The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Dark Road:, by Gaston Leroux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Dark Road:
       further adventures of Chéri-Bibi

Author: Gaston Leroux

Release Date: May 28, 2021 [eBook #65459]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images generously
             made available by Hathi Trust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DARK ROAD: ***
THE DARK ROAD

_Further Adventures of Chéri-Bibi_



BY

GASTON LEROUX



AUTHOR OF "THE SECRET OF THE NIGHT," "MISSING MEN,"
"WOLVES OF THE SEA"





CLEVELAND

THE GOLDSMITH PUBLISHING CO.




CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIV




CHAPTER I

THE NUT


The Nut lay on the scorching beach facing the terrible sea in which the
hungry sharks, the warders of his prison, were disporting. The convict
was like a weary animal at rest. In truth, he had availed himself of the
"relaxation" at ten o'clock to seek out a little fresh air and seclusion
between two precipitous crags which cut him off from the rest of the
convict settlement. If only he could live alone! No longer to hear
anything. No longer to see anything! No longer to think of anything. But
how could he help thinking of what he had seen, of what he had been
compelled to see, that morning?

A double execution had taken place that very morning as an awful but
necessary example. It was a smart piece of work by Pernambouc, the
prison executioner, and his assistant, "Monsieur Désiré." . . . Oh the
horror of it!

The Nut was still shuddering from the sight of it. He was a young man in
the fullness of his supple strength. He lay resting on his elbows,
holding his chin in the cup of his hands, apparently indulging in an
impossible dream. His broad-brimmed straw hat cast its shadow over the
gloom of his penetrating gaze which stole to the distant skyline. The
outline of his clean-shaven face as far as could be seen indicated
strength of character and shrewdness. Notwithstanding the ineffaceable
marks of prison life which soon transforms the youngest convict into an
old man, the Nut seemed to be scarcely more than forty years of age.

It was this combination of strength and refinement which had brought
down on him the nickname of The Nut. It is a word which in the language
of the Pré, or convict settlement, denotes a man whom nature has
endowed with a fine bearing usually appreciated by women. "He acted as
if he were the master." But the Nut's real name, Raoul de Saint-Dalmas,
had been in famous criminal records some ten years before when the jury
of the Seine Assize Court condemned him to death. He was a young man of
good family who, after squandering his substance, had been charged with
murdering his employer in order to rob him.

He owed his reprieve to his youth, to his mother, who in her despair
died of grief, and to the persistence with which he proclaimed his
innocence in spite of proofs which were seemingly overwhelming. And now
he was in the convict settlement undergoing a sentence of penal
servitude for life.

"Why do you sigh, Nut?"

He gave a start and turned round.

Bursts of coarse laughter rang out, and his eyes encountered seated
round him the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker. His dreams
had carried him so far away that he had failed to hear their approach.

The four men were his worst enemies. They never relented, and as a
result he had not hesitated latterly to get himself imprisoned for
months together in the île St. Joseph, the island of silence, which was
near, and reserved for those who committed offenses in the convict
settlement or whose feelings rebelled against the convict gang.

In order to avoid those four monsters who tormented him with their
infernal mischief-making and their abominable jokes, he tried to fasten
a quarrel on one of the convict guards by seriously threatening him, for
which he suffered the terrible punishment of internment on the adjoining
island, where the overseers themselves were not permitted to communicate
with the prisoners by word of mouth, but only by signs and in writing.

He left his solitary confinement with a feeling of regret, especially as
Chéri-Bibi, the astonishing bandit who had terrorized the world for so
many years--Chéri-Bibi had made a friend of him--was no longer there to
silence by a frown the loathsome Burglar or the Parisian himself.

Not that Chéri-Bibi was very far away. He was for the time being behind
bars in the principal building, and the Nut peeping through them one
morning when he was on fatigue duty, sweeping the courtyards, caught
sight of him and exchanged a few secret signs of friendship. It was done
in a flash, for the sergeant of the guard had entered the courtyard,
and, straightway, such volleys of insults were poured forth from the
rows of cells fronted with iron bars, that the hapless sergeant sounded
the call for the fatigue party, and ordered the cooks' mates who were
bringing along the soup to clear the courtyard, declaring in his wrath
that he would leave the "lifers" to starve and rot for three days.

Above the shouting of threats and the hideous tumult the Nut could hear
Chéri-Bibi's strident and vociferous laugh.

Neither the Parisian nor the Burglar nor the Caid nor the Joker would
have run the risk in this way of being sent to solitary confinement.
They managed to have a good time, standing in some favor with the
authorities, to whom they secretly related what they wanted to know
about the state of mind or the plans of escape of their fellow-convicts,
reaping no little reward for their treachery.

And even when their natural disposition to fight or plunder got the
better of them, they merely "copped," as a punishment, the job of
"taking a stroll with the wood," which meant that they had to move heavy
planks from one place to another for several hours a day, merely to take
them back again to the spot whence they came.

Just then, as they began to annoy the Nut, they were working in
leisurely fashion at certain odds and ends intended to be exchanged,
when a chance visitor appeared, for packets of tobacco or small change.
Arigonde, otherwise the Parisian, had just finished engraving with a
knife on a shark's jawbone the fateful words: _The Convict's Tomb._

Arigonde bore a deadly hatred against the Nut for having deposed him
from his position as the "man of fashion" in the Îles du Salut. Until
the Nut came upon the scene it was Arigonde who wielded the scepter of
elegance, if such a term may be allowed. Needless to say, this
reputation for elegance depended less upon the cut of his clothes or the
way in which he tied his tie than upon his manners, which were not met
with in the usual run of convicts, and bore witness to his superior
education. In spite of the Parisian's bragging--he was never at a loss
in telling the story of his successes with the fair sex in high circles
and crying up his relations in society--he seemed, compared with the
Nut, none the less to be what he was to begin with--a shopman in a small
firm bowing and scraping to the customers.

The Nut resumed his original posture on the beach, and it was as though
he did not hear the Joker, who squeaked:

"He lacks most who sighs most."

The others grinned.

"M'sieu Nut does not condescend to enter into conversation with humble
'jail-birds' like us," went on the Joker, who had once been a clerk to a
sheriff's officer and had assisted a client to murder his master.
"M'sieu Nut puts on airs and graces and fancies himself a bit."

"M'sieu Nut is grieving over the misfortunes of France," interjected the
rascally Burglar, a short man with disjointed limbs, who walked sideways
like a crab, and was wont to enter other people's houses by way of the
roof.

"The Caid, too, would like to make bang, bang on the Boches. The Caid
good soldier."

The Nut bit his fingers to prevent a groan slipping from him when he
heard the awful Ben Aïssa, the Mohammedan "jail-bird," a robber and
procurer of girls, ask to take part in the world struggle.

Alas, did he not himself long to play a part in it? And was it not
because they heard him on the evening when they learned of the
declaration of war proclaim once again his innocence and his despair,
and demand to be allowed to shoulder a rifle, that the wretched men in
their spite made game of him?

"I've just seen the postman on his way from the town," declared the
Parisian, "and he brings some very great news. It seems that Joffre
wants the Nut as his Chief of Staff!"

The Nut leaped to his feet, and the four men fell back, for he was a
match for them. Only they knew he shrank from the task of "pitching into
jail-birds," and indeed he contented himself with shouting a few threats
against them, which roused their laughter, though they kept their
distance.

"Do you think you can bounce us with the things you say," sneered the
Burglar. "Hold your jaw."

"All my eye and tommy rot," said the Burglar, prudently retiring into
the background. "All brag."

"When you've done talking I may have something to get off my chest,"
said the Parisian, who did not venture to try conclusions with the Nut,
but whose hatred of him was so intense that he would have liked to kill
him.

He made a step towards the Nut, who clenched his fists and began to see
red, when the arrival of another person put the four miscreants to
flight as if by magic. There was no need for the newcomer to open his
mouth. He had but to show his face.

It was Chéri-Bibi!




CHAPTER II

CHÉRI-BIBI


"Have you left the black hole?" asked the Nut.

"Yes," returned Chéri-Bibi, who held in his hand a peculiarly shaped
piece of hard wood which he was carving with the point of his knife.

It was an appalling face, was Chéri-Bibi's. His amazing adventures, the
long years passed in the convict settlement, broken by innumerable
escapes, his fierce passions and the martyrdom of the flesh even to the
corrosive marks of vitriol, had ravaged that terrible face so that no
one could look upon it without a shudder.

Nevertheless ever and anon--when his gaze rested upon the Nut for
instance--a curious gleam of kindliness would flicker across that
death's head.

His figure in its entirety, moreover, was extraordinary. His huge fists,
his square build, his shoulders which seemed to have been designed for
lifting enormous weights, all combined to convey the impression of
irresistible strength.

When he made an effort the muscles under his convict's jumper stood out
in startling prominence. He invariably wore this jumper. No one had ever
seen him, as they had seen his fellow-convicts, at work or walking about
stripped to the waist. It was said that upon his chest was tattooed the
mystery of his life and that these marks expressed the secret of his
heart. Chéri-Bibi was a man of great reserve in love affairs. This man,
whose crimes were beyond computation, had always possessed, as the
phrase goes, irreproachable morals.

Chéri-Bibi and the Nut imagined that they were alone. They did not
observe the Burglar warily retrace his steps and hide behind a rock in
order to keep an eye on them and overhear their conversation.
Chéri-Bibi sat down beside the Nut and proceeded with the carving of
his piece of wood.

"What's that?" asked the Nut.

"That's the key to freedom," returned Chéri-Bibi.

"What do you say?" exclaimed the Nut, turning pale.

Chéri-Bibi heaved a sigh that might have softened the hardest heart.

"I like you, old chum, and should have been glad of your company," he
said in a voice that failed him somewhat, "but I see clearly enough that
you are worrying yourself to death here. Cheer up. You will soon be
free. You will be able to go back to France, old man."

The Nut knew that when Chéri-Bibi spoke he spoke to some purpose. He
believed in him; and he was buoyed up by an immense hope.

"Back to France," he gasped.

"Twenty-two!" whispered Chéri-Bibi.

Twenty-two signified in convict language: "Look out!"

The Nut turned his head slightly and caught sight of the figure of a
convict guard passing not far away from them, his rifle slung over his
shoulder. The man cast a glance in their direction and disappeared,
strolling along the sea-front. The Burglar still occupied his post of
observation.

"I may tell you that I shall provide you with the papers of an honest
man. You shall have everything necessary to start afresh and be happy."

"Heavens above!" moaned the Nut.

He took a long look at Chéri-Bibi. Chéri-Bibi was weeping. The Nut
felt a thrill pass through him. Tears in the eyes of Chéri-Bibi! It was
a sight to which he was unaccustomed. Chéri-Bibi stuck his fists into
his eyes, as a punishment, doubtless, for that moment of weakness, and
uttered a frightful oath.

"Why don't you get away with me?" asked the Nut.

"Because I should be in your way, old man. You'll soon forget all about
Chéri-Bibi, I assure you."

"Never!" exclaimed the Nut. "You are the only man here who has been
decent to me. You have always stood up for me."

"Stood up for you! You don't need anyone to stand up for you. Under your
somewhat ladylike ways you are as strong as I am. If you had given those
fellows who are always jawing at you a sound thrashing they would have
soon stopped humbugging you. But you are too much of the gentleman to
fight them. For that matter, that's what attracted me to you. I like
people who have been well brought up; and then I like an honest man, and
you are an honest man. I believe you when you tell me that you are
innocent. I remember the time when I hadn't yet used the knife. Oh, it
remains impressed on my memory, does that first blow. I always carried a
knife in my belt. I was a journeyman butcher in Le Pollet. Do you know
Le Pollet? It's near Dieppe. No doubt you've been to the races there in
the summer. You were always a smart chap. . . . Why are you so pale
again?"

"Because I'm thinking of the races at Dieppe," returned the Nut, closing
his eyes.

"Yes, those were jolly days. Believe me, that was the place for smartly
dressed people. The pink of fashion, swagger officials in full fig, and
English swells. And the chorus girls, what brazen hussies! . . . But to
come back to my first affair with a knife, which happened on the cliff
at Dieppe. Some blackguard was about to do in a decent fellow. I arrived
on the scene. I tried to get at the blackguard with my knife, but killed
the honest man instead. And I was sentenced. _Fatalitas!_ That was the
beginning of all my troubles. But I don't want to think about them, nor
about France nor anything else. I have perpetrated more murders than
there are fingers on my hands. But always with the best intentions! You
know what I mean; it was hard luck. _Fatalitas!_ So it's better for me
to remain here forever, don't you think? A penal settlement, you see,
was made for me; it's my hearth and home. You, you are young, and that's
quite another pair of shoes. You can build up a new life. Marry an
honest woman and make her happy. Take my advice, and keep away from the
other sort of women. You've had your lesson in that particular, I dare
say."

"You bet!" returned the Nut smiling, greatly astonished to hear such
moral sentiments from Chéri-Bibi's mouth. "But you haven't yet told me
what you are making."

Chéri-Bibi did not answer immediately, but raising his eyes to the
jetty, the head of which sheltering the small natural harbor, could be
seen, said:

"Take a squint yonder."

The Nut turned his gaze to the harbor. A large motor launch, evidently
from the wood-cutting establishments at St. Laurent-du-Maroni, drew
alongside. An officer landed and was received on the jetty by a number
of officials.

"See what's taking place," went on Chéri-Bibi. "What do you make of
it?"

"Well," returned the Nut, "it's the officer who has just finished his
tour of inspection. They must be asking him for news of the war. It
doesn't seem to be good news. They don't look a bit pleased with
themselves."

"What then?"

"The lieutenant is stooping towards the launch."

"Ah, there you are," said Chéri-Bibi. "Well, what else?"

"The engineer is standing on the deck-house and has handed him something
which he is putting in his pocket."

"Stop! You've seen enough and now have a look at this."

Chéri-Bibi pointed to the piece of wood upon which he was no longer
working.

"This is an exact copy of the thing that the inspecting officer put in
his pocket. Do you know what that thing is? It is an indispensable part
of the motor, and without it the engine won't go. When he has it in his
pocket he is easy in his mind. There's no hope of the convicts making
use of the launch. When I went on fatigue duty to St. Laurent I had the
opportunity of examining that part. I assure you that this one is the
fellow to it, and if anything is missing, I'll make it this evening."

"This evening!" exclaimed the Nut.

"Yes, old man, you shall be free this evening, I give you my word. I've
finished digging a hole in my hut. We shall see some fun this evening.
Look out! . . . Warders coming. They're sounding the fall in."

The two men sprang up. The Nut was behind Chéri-Bibi, quivering with a
new hope. They went off to line up with the other men of their section
in a sunk road which was dominated by a government office. It was here
that they were employed in laying out a new road across the island.

During the whole of that day every movement by the Nut and Chéri-Bibi
was spied upon by the Burglar, and not a word was exchanged by them
which was not either overheard or guessed by him.

The Burglar said, between times, to the Parisian, the Caid and the
Joker:

"Hold yourself in readiness. Something's going to happen to-night when
we're having a game of dice."

After the last muster at six o'clock the convicts turned their steps
towards their prison almost with an air of cheerfulness. The day's work
was done. The men were then locked up in their prison, which consisted
of one large dormitory, and were left to do as they pleased, sleep or
drink or play games, free from the presence of the guards. Chéri-Bibi,
the Nut, the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker shared the
same dormitory with some twenty other men. That evening the officer made
a tour of inspection.

Standing in line in front of a double row of hammocks, they listened to
his remarks. He told them that he would not allow any noise in the
prison. They might consider themselves in their own homes, with doors
closed, but they were there for sleeping purposes, and if any complaint
was made against them, he would send the entire section to the cages in
the main building.

Before leaving he asked:

"Has any man anything to bring to my notice?"

The Nut stepped forward.

"There's a rumor, monsieur, that bad news has been received from
France."

"What interest can that be to you?" returned the officer harshly. "Men
like you have nothing more to do with France."

The Nut grew pale. A threatening murmur swept through the ranks. The
guards enforced silence by drawing their revolvers. Nevertheless one of
the men could not refrain from shouting:

"Give us a rifle and you'd soon see that we know how to die like other
men."

"You are not fit to shoulder a rifle," retorted the officer, and he
walked away.

The door closed after him. The convicts raised their clenched fists in
the air. A tumult of oaths filled the dormitory. The Nut flung himself
into his hammock and covered his face with his hands.

For men like the Nut, who had been laid low by the hand of fate, the
hours spent in the dormitory, however popular they might be with other
men because of the absence of all restraint, were undoubtedly the most
merciless which human justice could inflict. The herding together of
these men was an abominable sight. Every passion and vice, kept alive by
drink and gambling, had full rein. It was a veritable inferno.
Fortunately for the Nut fate, which was so cruel in other respects, had
vouchsafed Chéri-Bibi to him as his comrade. His presence and the
terror which he inspired forced the men to leave the Nut comparatively
undisturbed. As he lay in his hammock, he closed his eyes to shut out
the vision of those hideous faces, but he could not stop his ears. And
it was too awful. Bottles of rum, playing cards, money, appeared from no
one knew where, and the nightly revel began.

Chéri-Bibi lifted one of the slabs with which the floor of the prison
was paved without troubling about what was taking place around him. A
gaping cavity stood revealed before him, and he descended it. For the
last two months he had been digging at that outlet. Once he broke off
his work to get himself sent to solitary confinement for a week in order
quietly to finish carving the piece of wood which would enable him to
make use of the motor launch.

When he was digging at his hole his fellow-convicts helped him in the
morning to remove the earth which had collected during the night, so
that the warders might not perceive anything unusual. He promised them
that when his plan was completed there would be an opportunity for any
of them to escape if they had a mind for it. He did not enter into any
further explanation, and they let him go his own way, wondering what it
was that he was about to attempt.

The Parisian and his gang did not betray him for many reasons, not the
least of which was that Chéri-Bibi had declared that if they gave him
away he would know who did the deed, and, in any case, even if the
Parisian and the Burglar were innocent, he would cook their goose for
them. Another reason was that the Parisian and his friends were
themselves cherishing the idea of flight.

They retained the hope that Cheri-Bibi's scheme, when they knew it in
its entirety, would be useful to them. That evening, seated on their
kit-bags, in a corner, the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker
watched Chéri-Bibi as he slipped into his underground passage.

"Will your hole be ready soon?" asked the Joker.

"Give me another week," returned Chéri-Bibi, as he disappeared from
view.

The four convicts fished out their dice and began to play in the dismal
light of the lanterns hanging from the prison roof. Darkness had fallen,
for night comes quickly in tropical countries. In every part of the
dormitory men began to play games. Some of them were at cards. Bottles
were opened and the pungent odor of rum permeated the air.

The Nut was seemingly asleep in his hammock.

"Chéri-Bibi is lying to you," whispered the Burglar to his three
confederates. "Chéri-Bibi is tricking us. He's going to do the job
to-night. He'll get out through his underground passage, and put off in
the motor launch. He has found some dodge of making the engine go. The
Nut is to follow him in half an hour when he's ready to start the
engine. But our pals will prevent the Nut from getting away, and it's we
who'll do a guy. When Chéri-Bibi finds that the Nut doesn't turn up
he'll come back to fetch him, and we'll take the opportunity of jumping
into the launch, and off we'll go!"

The plot was cleverly contrived. The other "jail-birds" were furious
when they learned that Chéri-Bibi was putting them off, and held
themselves in readiness to act on a signal from the Burglar.

The Nut pretended to be asleep. Nevertheless he was consumed by a
feeling of intense excitement. At that terrible and decisive moment his
thoughts turned to his mother, who had died of grief, and he prayed to
her--his mother! He thought of the golden days of his youth. He lived
the past over again. He beheld the radiant picture of himself when life
smiled at him and he had but to stoop to pluck its most fragrant
flowers.




CHAPTER III

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST


Raoul had not known in that enchanted garden how to cull the flowers. It
needs very little to transform paradise into a garden of suffering. At
the dawn of life, as at the dawn of the world, it is enough for the
gesture of a woman to bring about the catastrophe.

What acts of folly he had committed for Nina Noha, the capricious
dancing-girl who scoffed at him and ruined him, tormented and drove him
mad with jealousy, and forced him into the worst excesses of gambling!

Thus he had weakly allowed himself to find an excuse for his early
excesses. Though the dancer was his first passion, she was not his first
love. It was in her society that he strove to forget a woman, a young
friend of his mother's, unhappily married to a man who loved her but
whom she did not love. She soon came to her senses. . . . But for Raoul
and this woman it had been a bitter experience, the secret of which now
filled him, when he thought of it, with a feeling of pain and sorrow.

But he quickly forgot the first incident in his life when he was in the
dressing-room at the theater, where Nina Noha every night made up her
voluptuous beauty anew after she had finished her dances which, frenzied
and languorous by turns, drew all Paris. He wanted to be the sole master
of this public favorite. . . . Stupid pride! . . . Madness! . . . At the
price of his inheritance he had purchased a few hours of pleasure, every
one of which he had to fight for.

The pity of it! He called to mind a first performance one evening in a
fashionable theater on the boulevard, in which Nina had made a huge hit.
She promised to go to supper with him. To enter a smart restaurant at
one o'clock in the morning with this woman, covered with jewels, on his
arm, was for Raoul a dazzling joy for which, like a child, he was ready
to give up everything that he possessed.

She was very amiable that evening and permitted him to make a parade of
her. Raoul de Saint Dalmas in the eyes of everyone present was the
fortunate friend of Nina Noha. What an unforgettable moment! He saw in
imagination the warm room, resplendent with light and gaily bedecked
women. He heard the Hungarian band and its wild music. He could have
repeated the remarks of his friends who did homage to Nina. But Nina
that evening gave no ear to them. Her smiles were reserved for him who
had promised to give her next day his last twenty thousand francs.

Twenty thousand francs for a smile from Nina was a trifle. But to pay
for it in a penal settlement was somewhat dear. . . . Open your eyes,
Raoul, and look round you, and see the party which is present at your
feast to-night. Here are faces which are somewhat different from the
faces that you saw at those festal occasions on the boulevard.

With what looks of deadly hatred the convicts bend over their unhappy
victim. The Nut does not say a word. He remains silent, this dog of a
Parisian who was as strong as a Turk and for over ten years had not once
condescended to come to blows with them. What were his thoughts under
his closed eyes? Oh, they were capable of tearing open those eyes to
discover what his dreams were about.

Poor, unfortunate Raoul, who in the gloom of prison could bring to life
again the glitter of those Parisian feasts and the glowing memory of
Nina Noha. . . . She was more cruel than his present taskmasters, was
that beautiful dancer who gave him short shrift when he was ruined. Then
his thoughts harked back to his sole refuge, his mother, who had
received the prodigal son with joy.

"Now you must work," she said. He promised sincerely to atone for his
sins. Mme. de Saint Dalmas took her son to an old friend of the family,
Charles Raynaud, a banker in Paris, who agreed to find an opening for
him in his business.

Raynaud was a very decent fellow whose own youthful days had not been
without blemish, but that did not prevent him from settling down later
on to work, and acquiring a considerable fortune. He himself determined
to train Raoul in memory of his father who had been a loyal friend. He
made him his private secretary and placed him in his own office. After a
few months, Raoul, who had shown a great will to work and an uncommon
intelligence, became Charles Raynaud's confidential man.

The unfortunate part was that Raoul had not ceased to think of Nina. He
endeavored to renew his relations with her. She declined even to see him
in her dressing-room at the theater. He greatly felt her contemptuous
treatment of him. That was the origin of the tragedy that followed.

On the Saturday before the races at Dieppe, Raynaud came into his office
with a friend at the moment when considerable sums of money were passing
through Raoul's hands and he was preparing to hand them over. While he
was counting bundles of ten thousand francs, Raynaud said to his friend:

"It's a certain tip. Volubilis is a twenty to one chance . . . a walk
over."

Just then the banker was called away to the next room. His friend did
not wait for him. Raoul's brain was on fire. He had arranged to go to
Dieppe the following day, less to see his mother who was on a visit
there, than because he knew that Nina would be at the races . . .
Nina . . . Volubilis. . . . A twenty to one chance and he had but two
louis in his pocket! His hands feverishly crumpled the bank-notes, one
of which would suffice to bring him a small fortune.

Charles Raynaud was an intimate friend of the owner of Volubilis, and
Raoul had no misgivings as to the value of the tip. He thought that he
would be in a position to refund the money next day after the race.
Nevertheless, to borrow money in that way, no matter what the amount
might be, or the hope of returning it, was known and called by a
definite name.

Raoul was about to unpin a bundle of ten thousand francs in order to
borrow one of a thousand francs, one only, when Raynaud came into the
office, and he scarcely had time to thrust the entire bundle into the
inside pocket of his jacket. The banker hastily threw the various
amounts which lay on the table into his safe, confident of Raoul's
accuracy and honesty. And he departed. . . . Behind him stood a young
man of a deathly pallor who made a gesture as if to detain him, but
Raynaud did not turn round. Raoul de Saint-Dalmas had five hundred louis
to put on Volubilis and was a thief.

* * * * *

The moment through which he lived next day when the bell in the reserved
enclosure announced that the horses were off, remained impressed forever
on his memory. What mingled feelings of torment and hope dwelled in his
heart! In a few moments, by his watch, he would either be ruined forever
or rich once more, and no one would suspect his shameful act of weakness
and Nina Noha would smile on him again.

It was for her sake that he had lived through that frightful moment. He
had spent the night wandering up and down, like a madman, under her
window. But some compensation was perhaps in store for him. A minute
would put an end to his doubts. Either it would be Nina or the Assize
Court.

He had no wish to see the race. He paced up and down behind the grand
stand. A cold sweat broke over his forehead. Had anyone met him, that
person would have had some difficulty in recognizing him, so greatly had
the madness of the moment distorted his features. His gloves were torn
to shreds.

An immense silence hung over the race-course as often happens in
critical moments when the fate of a great struggle hangs in
suspense. . . . And then suddenly the air was rent with a thousand
shouts: "Volubilis . . . Volubilis . . . Volubilis wins in a canter."

Raoul rushed to the grand stand, thrust aside the betters who loudly
protested, and arrived in time to see Volubilis, who at one time looked
like a winner, come in fourth. He descended the steps tottering like an
old man. He wanted straightway to leave the race-course. The thought of
committing suicide entered his mind. He met Nina surrounded by her
friends: "Well, my little man, your tip has cost me fifty louis." He
made no answer. He threw her a look of despair. He no longer loved her.
The moral disaster which had overtaken him was so complete that nothing
remained to him but a terrible contempt for her and himself.

"Forgive me, mother," he groaned. And it was for his mother's sake that
he abandoned the idea of suicide.

He asked himself, on her account, if there was not something better and
braver for him to do than to put a bullet in his brain. The instinct for
good which still existed deep down within him, and which the disorders
of his reckless youth could not wholly stifle, inspired him with a sense
of duty. Next morning he went to the office as usual. He had made up his
mind to confess everything to Raynaud.

The banker did not come in during the morning. Considerable sums of
money were still passing through Raoul's hands. Not for a moment was he
tempted to win back the stolen ten thousand francs by borrowing a
further sum. The thought did not even occur to him. His first offense in
this respect filled him with an unspeakable horror. He felt himself
capable of starvation with millions in front of him.

He was the first to return to the office after lunch. Raynaud had not
yet put in an appearance. Raoul's sufferings reached their culminating
point. A senior clerk in the firm who had occasion to speak to him was
struck by his pallor and air of abstraction. He did not seem to listen
to what was said to him.

"Are you not feeling well?" he inquired.

Raoul made no answer to the question but asked:

"Is Monsieur Raynaud coming to-day?"

"Yes, but he will be late. He is attending the sale of the Queen of
Carynthia's jewels."

Raynaud arrived at the office about six o'clock. He was not alone.
Several friends accompanied him and were congratulating him on the
purchase of a magnificent pearl necklace. Without noticing Raoul's
agitation he showed him the necklace in its case. Raoul had already seen
it, for Raynaud had been anxious to buy it and had taken him with him to
examine it the valuer's office. He bent over the pearls, unable to utter
a word. Raynaud imagined that he was purposely taking his time to
inspect it because one of the pearls had a flaw in it.

"I don't understand why they left that pearl in a necklace like this,"
said Raynard. "I shall have it taken out. As it is, the necklace is dirt
cheap at the price--a hundred and fifty thousand francs."

Raoul continued to gaze at the necklace so that Raynaud should not
observe his agitation. He would remember that scene for the rest of his
life.

"It's a clouded pearl but it may be possible to get it back to its
former luster."

An argument ensued on the subject and lasted some time among the
gentlemen who had come in with Raynaud. Then they took their departure
and Raoul and Raynaud were left to themselves. Raoul confessed
everything. While he was speaking the banker looked at him at first with
an air of amazement and afterwards with threatening severity. In a
trembling voice Raoul finished his story.

"It's not for myself. Monsieur, that I am pleading. It is that my mother
should not be told anything. I hold myself at your disposal and you can
do with me as you please. I am your property. I am willing to accept the
lowest kind of work, and if I have to earn the money a penny at a time,
I will pay back the ten thousand francs."

He ceased speaking. The banker maintained a silence, a dreadful and
prolonged silence. Raoul thought that all was over with him. He took his
revolver from his pocket.

Raynaud saw the movement and realized that Raoul was about to shoot
himself. He clutched him by the arm, snatched the weapon away, and threw
it on the desk.

"Wretched boy, what are you doing?"

Raoul sank to his knees and broke into a fit of sobbing. Raynaud helped
him to rise.

"Calm yourself, your mother shall not be told anything."

The banker turned the key in the door which separated his office from
the general offices of his company and came back to Raoul.

"You understand that the worst part of this terrible business is that
you, who received an exceptionally good education, and whom I wish to
regard in spite of all as an honest man at heart--your confession and
your repentance show me that--were unable to resist so sordid a
temptation. You are more to blame than anyone else would be in your
place. . . . I will tell you what I have decided upon. You must leave
Paris and France and all these Nina Nohas who have brought you to such
a pass. You must go and build up a new career in America. You must sail
by the mail boat which leaves Havre for New York to-morrow morning. I
will tell your mother that I have sent you to America on urgent business
of importance. You must catch the express train at eight o'clock
to-night. You have no time to lose."

So saying, he opened his safe and took out two bundles of bank-notes,
each of which contained ten thousand francs.

"Do the best you can for yourself with this money and become an honest
man again. I don't want your thanks. I am doing this in remembrance of
your father who rendered me many great services."

Distraught and overcome with gratitude, Raoul left the room with the
twenty thousand francs. The banker himself opened the door of his
private entrance which led direct through the courtyard into the street.

The safe remained open.

Scarcely a minute had elapsed after Raynaud's return to his office when
the staff in the other part of the building heard the sounds of a great
commotion--shouting, struggles and a revolver shot. They rushed to the
private office. They had to break in the door. When they entered the
room they found Raynaud lying dead on the floor in front of the safe
with a bullet in his head.

The necklace, as well as the securities and bank-notes--everything of
negotiable value was gone.

They looked about for Raoul. He was nowhere to be found. They called to
mind his singular demeanor during the day. The police investigation,
which was held that evening, showed that the revolver, which was still
hot when it was discovered in the office, was bought by Raoul that very
morning. They felt convinced that it was he who did the deed, nor did
they doubt that he had escaped through the window, which was left open
and looked out on to the roof of a small room, arranged corbel-wise,
whence it was easy to reach, through another window, the staircase of
the adjoining building.

Next morning Raoul was arrested at Havre at the moment when he was about
to embark on the mail boat for New York.

It was in vain that he protested his innocence. His own counsel did not
believe him. The evidence was too overwhelming. The sequel is known.




CHAPTER IV

IN THE NIGHT


Chéri-Bibi, as we have seen, left the dormitory and slipped into his
opening under the floor.

The underground passage, which he had dug out with a patience and
cunning which is only to be found in a convict settlement, was a
tremendous piece of work, given the extreme simplicity of the tools at
his command, which consisted of a knife, a piece of sharp-pointed iron,
and a few sardine tins. Nevertheless he achieved his purpose with them
single-handed, for he refused to allow anyone else to have a finger in
the pie. The passage was over three hundred feet long, running forward
as far as possible through the loamy earth, but keeping clear of the
sand and emerging between two precipitous rocks, at a spot which was
almost entirely deserted, especially at night. Moreover, this outlet was
on the beach along which Chéri-Bibi had to make his way in order to
reach the jetty where the motor launch lay moored.

When he appeared at the opening of the cavity it was about nine o'clock
in the evening. The night was cloudless with the brightness peculiar to
tropical countries. Thus he had to take the greatest precaution to avoid
being observed by the guards on duty or those going their rounds.

But apart from these patrols which covered the same ground, at fixed
hours, the guards' duty was reduced to the simplest proportions. It was
the dinner hour for the officials, and of rest for the convicts locked
up in their dormitories.

A warder, with his rifle slung over his shoulder, was usually seated on
a bench placed against a hut at the far end of the jetty, acting in a
vague sort of way as sentry, and smoking and yawning and waiting for the
moment when his relief would come. That evening, as Chéri-Bibi crept
along the jetty on all fours, he perceived that the warder was not in
his place. Where was he? Had he fallen asleep in the hut? Was he dodging
his sentry duty and having a tot of rum with some of his mates?

"A good thing for him," muttered Chéri-Bibi, as he dropped into the
launch. And he added, still to himself, "And all the better for me!" He
shrank, as a rule, from acts of violence. He could only make up his mind
to them when circumstances were too strong for him, and he had had
sufficient occasion in the past in this respect to upbraid fate; and
thus he could be grateful to Providence, which for once in a way had
spared him from taking the life of a man!

* * * * *

Half an hour after Chéri-Bibi's departure a curious silence fell in the
dormitory. Every game was stopped and every eye turned in one direction.
The cavity made by Chéri-Bibi was almost directly under the Nut's
hammock, and his legs had just reached the floor when he stopped short,
taken aback by the sudden hush.

The convicts rushed up to him.

"Where are you going?"

The Nut saw by their threatening attitude that they would stick at
nothing to prevent him from leaving the dormitory.

He sought to argue with them.

"I'm going to meet Chéri-Bibi. He has asked me to lend him a hand. What
is there in that to annoy you?"

The Nut never used prison slang. That also had helped to excite their
animosity against him, and they could not forgive him for holding aloof
from them now as he did in the first days.

"Rot, humbug, swanker . . . liar! It's not true. Chéri-Bibi won't let
anyone help him in the job. There's no need for you to work for him."

"He asked me to join him."

"You lie. You've got to stay here. Take my advice. It'll be all the
better for you if you put your feet up and do a snore."

It was the Parisian who did the talking. For that matter he kept a safe
distance from the Nut. The Burglar, for his part, was leading his
confederates somewhat craftily, pushing as near the Nut as possible,
thinking to himself that there could not be too many of them, and there
would be a row.

The fight was begun by a violent movement from the Caid, who seized the
Nut by the legs and threw him into the hammock. The Nut sprang out after
the Caid, who managed to slip away. A score of men made for the Nut and
the thud of heads striking the flagstones was heard.

The dormitory in which these wild beasts were tearing each other to
pieces was rent with hollow groans and hoarse cries. Feeling that his
fellow-prisoners' hatred of him was such that they would never allow him
to get away, the Nut, whose last hope was in death, determined to sell
his life dearly. But before he died he would recompense himself for all
his sufferings, all that he had undergone from those hideous jailers who
were more odious than the warders, and fiercer than the sharks
themselves who lay in wait for their prey behind the rocks in the Île
Royale.

He fought like a lion. Many of the men who came up against him were to
bear for some time the marks of the desperate encounter. Nevertheless he
was soon felled to the ground, in the narrow space, by weight of
numbers.

Almost smothered, reduced to helplessness, twenty convicts lay heavily
on his limbs and he was tightly and strongly bound with a rope which
appeared as if by magic. Then he was flung into his corner, gasping for
breath, worsted. He closed his eyes so that they should not behold his
distress.

Thus at the moment when he was thinking of making good his escape, the
purgatory was to begin all over again. Continue to live this life! He
would rather die! Why had they not killed him a few minutes before? Why
had not the iron grip of those murderous fingers round his throat set
him free from his terrible existence? He had suffered torment for ten
years; ten long years during which he had never ceased to hope for his
deliverance by flight and for the miracle which would establish his
innocence. Now he no longer hoped for anything. He thought only of how
to end his life. . . .

And in the meantime Chéri-Bibi was waiting for him . . . Chéri-Bibi
who had prepared everything, who had done wonders. . . . To what end?

Among the hideous faces bending over the Nut, he would have looked in
vain now for the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker. The four
men, during the fight, had slipped into the underground passage dug out
by the most terrible man among the "lifers."

Suddenly a shot rang out in the stillness. They all gave a start. And
"Monsieur Désiré" who for a tin of sardines and a packet of cigarettes
usually acted as assistant to Pernambouc, the prison executioner,
whispered to the Nut:

"Did you hear that? They're playing with the shooters not far from the
coast. Chéri-Bibi may have been hit. He won't get you away to-night.
Mind the Inspector doesn't find out that you are chums with him. It'll
be a bad look out for the convicts. Take it from me, the finish of it
will be that I shall have your noddle." And he added with a hideous
laugh, "You know I shan't say no to that, because I'm out of tobacco.
I've given it all away to pals. 'Monsieur Désiré' has a good heart."

They heard the gallop of the patrols, and a voice in the distance
shouted:

"Chéri-Bibi's done for."

The Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker, after getting away
through the underground passage, reached the outlet without hindrance.

"Congratulations to Chéri-Bibi," said the Joker as he inhaled the cool
night air. "He ought to have been born a mole!"

"Shut up and let's get on with it," interjected the Burglar. "It won't
be long before Chéri-Bibi comes back for news of the Nut. . . . Look
out how we go."

They followed the high rocks which skirted the sea, and at times the
waves buried them up to the knees.

"Halt!" cried the Parisian.

"Thanks for the foot-bath," grunted the Joker.

"Me always satisfied, never ill, never die," babbled the Caid.

"If we go a step farther Chéri-Bibi will see us," exclaimed the
Parisian.

The four men stood stock still. They had caught sight of Chéri-Bibi's
head rising cautiously above the gunwale with the purpose, obviously, of
scrutinizing the immediate precincts. What the four bandits anticipated
did in fact happen. Failing to understand why the Nut kept him waiting
so long, Chéri-Bibi, in a state of some uneasiness, made up his mind to
go back the way he had come and see for himself the reason of the delay.

The Parisian and his confederates saw him get out of the launch and
crawl along the jetty, moving with the greatest precaution, and stopping
to listen for any suspicious sounds that might disturb the silence of
the night. Thus he reached the beach. As had been already stated, it was
easy to keep out of sight because of the great mass of high rocks which
overhung the sea shore. It was entirely different from the beach at
Kourou and the mainland. That part of the island is flat and devoid of
vegetation.

Thus Chéri-Bibi, who was well screened by the rocks, continued his way
without obstacle; but, on the other hand, he could not see the four
runaways, who were less than thirty feet away from him, because of those
very rocks.

After he had disappeared in the semi-darkness, the four men, in their
turn, crawled on to the jetty and thence dropped into the launch. It did
not take them long, but they were no sooner settled in her than the
Burglar gave the alarm. Chéri-Bibi was coming back.

They concealed themselves in the deck-house, hardly daring to breathe,
waiting for what would come next. Why had Chéri-Bibi returned so
quickly? Had his suspicions been aroused? The Nut's redoubtable friend
filled them with such terror that they were afraid of his shadow like
children who, passing through the forest at night, fear the were-wolf.

They were unarmed. Chéri-Bibi must have weapons, and even if it were
not so, they would make very little, the four of them, in his huge paws.
Moreover, they knew that certain persons who had a fancy to thwart his
plans paid for it with their lives. They had abundant reasons for
keeping quiet.

But what was Chéri-Bibi doing? They no longer had him in view. He had
disappeared behind the engine. Soon, however, they saw him stand up and
make off once more with the same degree of caution as before. When he
had vanished from sight the Burglar, who had been an engine driver in
his time, whispered:

"Hurry up, you fellows. Break the padlocks of the mooring chains."

The three men were applying themselves to the work when a frightful oath
uttered by the Burglar made them turn round:

"Chéri-Bibi has taken away his part of the engine," he cried.

"Nothing more can be done. It's all up with us," groaned the Joker,
flung into consternation, and he stopped the Caid, who with an iron
grip, was continuing to pull at the padlocks.

"That's why he came back, the traitor," growled the Parisian. "Listen to
me. We've got to make up our minds to it, and go to bed in the
deck-house. There's just a chance that he won't see us when he comes
back with the Nut. They'll make tracks for the mainland. When they've
landed we'll hop out after them. If they twig us on the way, I don't
think they'll waste time taking us back to the settlement. It's a good
idea--let's lie low."

In the meantime Chéri-Bibi continued his way to the opening of the
underground passage. He glided over the ground with the suppleness of a
great stag. Suddenly he pulled himself up. He heard voices. And almost
at once he caught a glimpse of the silhouettes of the Inspecting Officer
and the Commandant of the Penitentiary Administration. They were taking
a stroll after dinner, smoking their cigars and talking strategy. The
startling events of the war engrossed them to such an extent that,
having stopped to discuss Joffre's retreat, the position of Sarrail at
Verdun and Castelnau at Nancy, they remained stationary for a quarter of
an hour; thus preventing Chéri-Bibi from making a step. _Fatalitas!_
His guns were spiked!

Greatly perturbed at first by the Nut's failure to arrive, Chéri-Bibi
now dreaded to see him emerge from the underground passage, for he would
be bound to attract the attention of the two officers.

Time went on. And an accident might happen to destroy, in its entirety,
the plan which he had so laboriously constructed.

At that moment a tremor passed through him from head to foot. It was
seldom that he shuddered, but he saw before him a terrible sight. Coming
towards him was a huge dog, a veritable sleuth-hound, whose business it
was, also to keep guard, and the dog was charging straight at him.

"Hullo!" said the Commandant. "Here's Tarasque going his rounds. Here!
Tarasque! Come here!"

But the huge brute instead of answering the officer's call continued to
make for Chéri-Bibi, who, with a feeling of unutterable anguish, saw
him rushing up to him.

Strange to say Tarasque did not give tongue. Thus the two officers
continued to discuss their ideas of strategy without paying any further
attention to the dog. They entertained no suspicion that ten paces away
from them a fierce drama was being enacted.

Tarasque was friends with Chéri-Bibi. How had this thing arisen between
man and dog? They had taken to each other at their first meeting. Had
this monster of a dog scented a brother in this monster of a man?

Their two jaws had more than a passing resemblance, and their instincts
for destruction were such that they were bound to understand each other.
One thing was certain--Tarasque, who had for the wastrels of the penal
settlement but his canine teeth, had a tongue with which to lick
Chéri-Bibi's hands whenever he met him.

The reader who is familiar with the early adventures of Chéri-Bibi, and
knows what a peculiar wealth of affection lay hidden in the heart of the
great criminal--the victim of fate--will comprehend the attachment which
he felt for the huge brute who was then making so much of him.

But coming at that moment, that exhibition of friendship would destroy
him no less utterly than the most infuriated attack, and at the same
time, be the undoing of the Nut.

Chéri-Bibi loved the dog, but he had promised the Nut his liberty. If
those friendly demonstrations continued for a few seconds longer, the
two officers, put on their guard, would come upon the dog and
Chéri-Bibi.

He held the dog's head under his arm, and feeling in his pocket with his
other hand, took out a knife, the blade of which was open. It was a
question of killing the brute in such a way that it would drop dead at
his feet.

Chéri-Bibi felt a clutch at his heart. He had killed many persons in
the course of his life, as the result, as it seemed to him, of
inexorable circumstances, and he had suffered for it, but never before
had he been filled with such horror.

He patted the dog and the dog licked his face. And during this dire
caress the sharp and unerring point of his knife penetrated Tarasque's
throat and cut it at a single blow, "without working back in the cut,"
as butchers say in their particular jargon.

Chéri-Bibi had been a journeyman butcher in the days of his youth. He
knew his business. Alas, he had proved it many a time since. He knew how
to kill effectively. The dog gave a prolonged and terrible gasp and fell
dead, deluging Chéri-Bibi with blood.

"_Fatalitas!_" he groaned under his breath. And that ghastly moment was
set down in his memory as among the most frightful in his frightful
career.

"It's very strange," said the Commandant. "What's the matter with
Tarasque, gasping like that? Tarasque, here! Come here!"

As Tarasque did not answer the call, the two officers started up greatly
perplexed. They went to the rock behind which they had seen him
disappear and found him lying on the ground.

"What's the matter with him? Is he ill? Tarasque! . . . Tarasque!"

They leaned forward. The dog was still warm. Suddenly the Lieutenant
rose from his stooping posture with an oath and shook his hand, which
was covered with blood. He had thrust it into the dog's throat.

Someone had cut the dog's throat!

The Commandant uttered an oath in his turn. The thing was past all
belief. They had seen nothing, heard nothing. It must have been the work
of a "lifer" who had escaped. He at once raised the alarm by firing his
revolver in the air; and a patrol which was passing along the beach came
hurrying up.

In order that the reader may understand what is about to happen, it may
be as well to give an approximate idea of the general formation and
aspect of this part of the world.

The Îles du Salut are divided one from the other by channels of some
hundreds of yards in width. There is a sheltered roadstead in which the
largest ships may ride at anchor. The mail boat belonging to the
Compagnie Transatlantique which sails in the ordinary way between
Martinique and Guiana, touches the islands both on her inward and
outward journeys. The full strength of the Penitentiary is very
considerable. The islands, in fact, are used as a depot, and convicts
condemned to transportation remain there some time before they are
classified, registered, and distributed.

The Commandant and the various administrative services are lodged on the
Île Royale, as also are the victualling departments and a large
hospital to which sick convicts from the Penitentiaries and Wood-cutting
establishments at Cayenne and St Laurent are removed. In this island
also are workshops for the manufacture of clothing, boots, and caps
required for the use of the convicts.

The difficulty of escape, together with the possibility of maintaining a
most rigorous discipline, caused Île Royale to be selected as the
Penitentiary for hardened criminals and notorious outlaws.

There is a brick manufactory, and near the hospital, at the western end,
stands a lighthouse with a fixed light which is visible at a distance of
nearly twenty miles.

The islands can be observed and recognized from afar, for they are of
some height. Île Royale is the highest, and rises to about two hundred
feet above the sea level. From the mainland it has the appearance, in
shape, of an irregular sugar-loaf.

But to return to Chéri-Bibi, whose position was extremely precarious.
He had been able to retreat without being observed, but in order to
reach his tunnel he would have to cross an open space in which it would
be impossible for him to conceal himself. On the other hand, he could
not remain where he was, twenty paces from the dog's body, hiding behind
a great overhanging rock where the convict guards were bound to discover
him.

He heard one of the men who answered the Commandant's call for
assistance say:

"There's been a great stir among the convicts since yesterday. The rumor
goes that the Parisian Intends to skedaddle."

Now a "deputy-warder" filled the night with his resounding imprecations.
. . . Someone had killed his dog, his Tarasque. . . . It must have been
Chéri-Bibi who did the deed. Tarasque never allowed anyone to come near
him but Chéri-Bibi. . . .

When they heard that he had escaped, or at any rate was attempting to
escape, and was at large in the island, the warders began to lose their
heads. His escapes were so sensational, and were accompanied by such
amazing incidents, that the very thought of it was enough to rob them of
their self-control.

They must warn the guard; put the whole garrison on the alert.

The Commandant and the Lieutenant pulled them up. Chéri-Bibi could not
be far away.

He had killed the dog a few spaces from the spot where they were
standing. That spot was open ground. The scoundrel could not cross it
without being detected. And as a logical consequence the Commandant took
a step towards the rock which hid Chéri-Bibi from view.

The latter was thinking things out.

"Shall I let them lay hold of me, give myself up now, content to begin
the whole thing over again?"

He was in a quandary because of the formidable and unforeseen
difficulties which loomed up before him. . . . And then the very
agglomeration of difficulties was a temptation to that demoniacal mind.
He thought, too, that he would never be able to renew a scheme which had
once miscarried. He would have to devise something else; start another
plan, which would take him endless time. He would be sent to solitary
confinement for months; his tunnel would be discovered; and perhaps his
"fake" for the motor launch would no longer be possible. Finally, he had
given his word of honor to the Nut.

When Chéri-Bibi had given his word of honor there was no instance in
which he had not kept it to the uttermost, whether for good or evil,
though he had wandered so long between the two, knife in hand, that he
had not always very clearly distinguished the difference between them.
Well, once again he would conquer or lose his reputation together with
his life.

The Commandant was approaching the rock.

He was about to discover him. It was a crucial moment for the convict.
He could only save the situation by a surprise and some marvelous
effort.

The rock projected over a sort of sloping bank, and a number of guards
had just reached the foot of it. Chéri-Bibi, during the last minute,
had propped himself up against the rock, and was quietly exercising his
tremendous strength.

Suddenly the rock, forced from its bed of clay, swung over and fell on
to the warders. They set up a terrible outcry. Some of them were
seriously injured.

The Commandant and his brother officer barely had time to fling
themselves on one side. Availing himself of the confusion which ensued,
Chéri-Bibi rushed into the darkness. He fled in the direction of the
forest. The guards who were unhurt followed closely upon his heels.

At the moment when he was about to elude them by jumping over a bank
lined with tall bamboo-canes, his eyes encountered above him a warder
who was leveling his rifle at him. He had no time even to duck his head.
The shot rang out, and Chéri-Bibi fell in a mass, crushing the branches
with his enormous weight like a giant utterly overwhelmed.

An immense shout of joy greeted the well-directed shot: "Chéri-Bibi is
dead!"




CHAPTER V

HOW CHÉRI-BIBI DIED


The Nut in the dormitory attempted by a supreme effort to shake off his
bonds. He could not believe in Chéri-Bibi's death. For that matter his
opinion was shared by the convicts in general: "Do you think that
Chéri-Bibi would allow himself to peg out like that?"

The commotion outside the building drew still nearer. The convicts paid
no farther heed to the Nut. They were absorbed in the drama which was
being played in the darkness of the night, endeavoring to understand or
imagine its successive phases.

The horror of the position inspired the Nut with renewed energy. The
longing to have done with it either by escape or by some violent measure
which would involve the end of all, increased tenfold his energy which
for a moment had been flagging. Yes, death even at the hands of
Pernambouc or "Monsieur Désiré" would be better than to continue to
live like this.

His persistent and vigorous efforts at length loosened his bonds.
Slowly, with infinite precaution, and without anyone being able to
notice the least movement, he succeeded in ridding himself of the rope.

He lay in wait for the moment when he could spring from his hammock and
slip into the cavity, at the other end of which he hoped to meet
Chéri-Bibi.

He quickly dropped on to his feet. But just then the report of more
firing burst upon them from the outside, accompanied by a great hubbub.

The Nut hesitated for a second, which was long enough to bring all the
"lifers" round him.

"The deputy warders are firing on Chéri-Bibi. He's nabbed. Look out!
They're calling up the guard. Before five minutes are over we shall have
them here blaming the whole lot of us," exclaimed one of them.

They put away the rope and carefully adjusted the flagstone, the seams
of which they cemented with moistened bread-crumbs coated with dust.
Outside, the galloping of patrols, shouts, curses, calls for help and
the blowing of whistles could still be heard. Finally the commotion
approached the building and the door of the dormitory was opened.

A dozen warders, armed to the teeth, crowded in among the convicts, and
the Lieutenant's voice could be heard ordering the "fall-in." The
convicts lined up beside their hammocks.

The Lieutenant saw for himself that five men were missing: Chéri-Bibi,
the Burglar, the Parisian, the Caid and the Joker, for these men failed
to respond when their numbers were called. The Nut answered when his
turn came: Number 3213.

The Lieutenant left the dormitory in a towering rage. He gave orders for
two men to remain on guard inside, and the others to be stationed round
the building.

"This time I'm really cornered," said the Nut to himself.

Worn out by his struggles and the anxiety through which he had passed,
and overcome by the ruin of his last hope, he dropped on to his
convict's kitbag; and meantime the two warders left on guard in the
dormitory endeavored to discover the means by which the five men had
managed to get away.

The convicts laughed in their sleeves at the fruitlessness of these
investigations. One of them said loud enough to be heard:

"They won't catch Chéri-Bibi in a hurry. He'll make short work of
anyone standing in his way, you bet."

"Well, I tell you that he's lost the number of his mess," roared one of
the warders told off to keep watch on them. "I know what I'm talking
about, I suppose? I've seen his corpse."

"Did you hear what that warder said?" whispered "Monsieur Désiré" to
the Nut. "He said it's true that Chéri-Bibi has been done in. He's seen
his corpse."

A shudder passed through the Nut. He had a great liking for Chéri-Bibi.
This affection of a young man like the Nut for a convict built on the
lines of Chéri-Bibi--a man who seemed the embodiment of crime in this
world--was extraordinary. And yet it was not entirely incomprehensible.
The monster had shown him a compassion for his misfortunes which he had
sought in vain from anyone else in jail or out of jail. Beneath his
frightful exterior Chéri-Bibi proved that he was possessed of feelings
of an unsuspected degree of refinement. He treated and protected the Nut
like a younger brother.

The Nut had often thought that there was something beyond mere defiance
of fate in the use of the word _Fatalitas_ that the convict so
frequently hurled at the heavens. Chéri-Bibi's life was a secret whose
depths no one had ever plumbed but himself. What did anyone know of him?
. . . An arm that was upraised and struck home. But between the two
gleams of the knife which left behind it two pools of blood all was
darkness; as mysterious as the abyss of his soul. . . . Why was his path
stained with blood?

He explained to the Nut in a few words, with what terrible irony fate
had compelled him to strike down the man whose life he was trying to
save. That was the beginning of it all.

The beginning of it all? The Nut sometimes felt an inclination to fathom
the mystery of that word _all._

"Don't look into it," Chéri-Bibi answered. "It would be hell let
loose."

And then he stood up and with a fierce cynicism said:

"You can't want me to account for all my murders. There are too many of
them." And he added with a boisterous laugh: "Take it from me that I am
past all forgiveness."

* * * * *

"Spot the Nut blubbing because he thinks Chéri-Bibi is dead," went on
"Monsieur Désiré" bent on making mischief.

The Nut wished only to remember Chéri-Bibi as the man who liked him and
often saved him from an act of desperation; as the man who by a
memorable action had saved himself from the guillotine. It seems that
after certain adventures of which one of the most sensational was the
capture of the vessel which was commissioned to take convicts to the
penal settlement in Guiana, he was rearrested in France, brought to
trial, and this time sentenced to death.

Chéri-Bibi told the Nut that he had not opened his lips during the
trial. His counsel defended him against his will; and when the dread
sentence was pronounced the prisoner thanked the jury for their service
to him as well as to society.

That very evening as a prison van was taking him back to the central
prison of the town in which he was tried, he heard a heart-rending
clamor, and as he was stepping out of the van, he saw that the hospital
which stood in the same square was on fire.

It was the work of a moment to free himself from his jailors and to leap
into the flames. That evening, single-handed, he saved the lives of
sixty.

"Fire!" he cried, "I'm used to fire."

He left the hospital only to return to it and to come out again with his
precious burdens. When the whole of the inmates had been rescued, he
gave himself up as a prisoner. His body was a mass of burns.

Throughout France there was but one opinion: He must be reprieved. Thus
the death penalty was commuted to penal servitude for life.

"_Fatalitas!_" said the prisoner when the news was broken to him. "So
there's still need for me to kill someone in the world!"

* * * * *

For a wonder the sight of the Nut's grief ended by softening the hearts
of those wild beasts.

"Don't take on, Nut. It's all rot. I tell you that Chéri-Bibi is right
enough. To begin with he can't kick the bucket. There are chaps like
that. The very sight of them makes death turn tail."

Twenty voices were ready to join with the one which had attempted to
hearten the unhappy Nut. The thought of a catastrophe of such magnitude
as the death of Chéri-Bibi did not enter the minds of a single one of
them. Only a warder--or a mischief-maker like "Monsieur Désiré," would
entertain such ridiculous nonsense. The man who could bring down
Chéri-Bibi was not yet born. Chéri-Bibi had always done what he had
set his mind to do.

When he longed to be off there was nothing more to be said. He knew how
to let himself out! The warders were well aware of that. They had seen
him subject to the most rigid discipline, never out of sight of a
convict guard whose sole duty was to keep watch on his movements, and
yet he had found means of getting the better of every obstacle. Moreover
he had declared beforehand that he was going away. At the appointed day
and hour, the thing was done.

Though he came back again and allowed himself to be recaptured, it was
undoubtedly because he could not do without the air of the Pré. As he
himself said: "A penal settlement is my hearth and home."

It was known that Chéri-Bibi invariably carried about with him his
"outfit;" that is to say, everything that was necessary to enable him to
escape when "it suited him." And no one knew how he managed to conceal
the things.

On one occasion he allowed himself to be caught. He put his "going away
kit" in a shoemaker's last over which he placed a piece of leather
studded with nails as if he intended to begin making a pair of boots but
the last was hollow and could be unscrewed, and it contained an
elaborate collection of "necessaries"--mustaches, whiskers, false hair,
a chisel, a small saw for sawing iron made from the spring of a watch, a
tiny hand mirror for dressing purposes, needles and thread, and pen and
paper.

He often let his shoemaker's last lie about on his bed, and sometimes he
folded it under his arm when he went on forced labor.

It was quite an event when one day the inspecting officer who had been
noticing the last for some time, ended by considering that the work of
making a pair of boots was taking too long and confiscated it.

This time the fat was in the fire. But Chéri-Bibi had no end of other
tricks up his sleeve. He would always get the better of them; that was
certain.

At this point in the discussion the door was opened and a deputy warder
entered. He came to inquire if they had yet discovered the way by which
the five convicts had escaped. His two colleagues replied by a shrug of
the shoulders.

"Say what you like, they can't have flown away," observed the newcomer.

"Ask Chéri-Bibi."

"Chéri-Bibi's dead."

"Ah, what did I tell you," exclaimed one of the warders. "Our customers
here refuse to believe it."

"He was killed in the bamboo plantation. The Commandant himself was
leading the battle. Bordière fired the shot. Chéri-Bibi was right up
against his rifle. Seems that he turned head over heels like a rabbit.
Oh, there's no mistake about it. It was bound to end like that. . . .
Good-by. I'm off. . . . Oh, it's made a great to do I can tell you. You
must have heard the firing on Devil's Island. There's a great stir among
the convicts. But there'll be some pickings for those who find the other
four. Bordière is in luck's way. He'll get extra pay this month over
this Chéri-Bibi job."

The man left the room. The door was closed behind him and a great uproar
of mingled amazement and incredulity arose, for the convicts found it
impossible to believe the monstrous story. Chéri-Bibi let himself be
knocked over like a rabbit!

Suddenly, while the warders were discussing the event at the far end of
the dormitory, a flagstone was quietly raised, and the Nut and the men
who were behind the warders saw Chéri-Bibi's terrible and distorted jaw
emerge from the cavity.

No, Chéri-Bibi was not dead. He was not even wounded. He had played his
trick of tumbling to the grounds as if he were shot dead when the warder
fired his rifle, so as to distract the guards' attention from the outlet
of his underground passage, which he determined to reach, whatever
happened, in order to meet the Nut.

What he reckoned on had come about, and when the guards recognized the
figure of Chéri-Bibi falling to the ground as he spun on his heels,
they made a rush towards him uttering a shout of triumph.

Bordière, the warder, climbed the bank with a light step calculating in
his mind the amount of the extra pay which a deed of this sort would be
worth to him. The authorities would undoubtedly be grateful to him for
relieving them of a brute whom it was so difficult to keep in his cage.

Men hurried up from all directions. The Commandant himself followed
close upon them, and the report gradually spread over the island that
Chéri-Bibi had at last returned to the lower regions. Some of the
warders, as we have said, declared that they had seen his corpse.

The truth was that they searched for him in vain. Bordière, the lucky
Bordière, who was responsible for so smart a piece of work, became
enraged when he could find no traces of Chéri-Bibi apart from the marks
among the bamboos. He offered his own explanation of the mystery: "I saw
him fall here. He gave a loud cry and collapsed. Look at all this blood.
He's certainly mortally wounded. He must have crawled away to croak a
little farther on."

The thing was inexplicable, something very like magic. The Commandant
stood silent, not knowing what to think. Had Chéri-Bibi any accomplices
among his men? Had he bought some of them? How was it possible to tell
with a man like that?

They related the story that he invariably carried gold-dust on him.
Where? How? They were never able to determine. Some of them went so far
as to maintain that he could hide at will thirty gold louis in his
stomach. He ate gold, swallowed it, got rid of it, secreted it, and
recovered it again as he pleased.

It was a pack of silly tales to which the authorities attached no
importance, but now the Commandant began to think that there might be
something in them.

Nevertheless what had really happened was capable of an extremely simple
explanation. Chéri-Bibi had slipped away through the undergrowth until
he came to his retreat and thence reached his opening; and the reason
why blood was found on the bamboos was because he had wiped his hands,
stained with Tarasque's blood, on them. While the warders were searching
for a dead body he was in his tunnel; and thus his head appeared in the
dormitory at the moment when the news of his death was exciting so much
talk.

He summed up the situation at a glance. He saw the warders. He saw the
Nut. He saw his brother "lifers" who, transfixed in amazement,
restrained the burst of laughter with which they were ready to greet the
startling vision that contradicted so flatly the warders' stories.

In a flash the Nut crept into the cavity and vanished from sight, while
Chéri-Bibi kept the other convicts at bay by the ferocity of his look.

The flagstone fell back in its place.

When the convict guards turned round nothing seemed changed in the
dormitory. Stay! There was one convict the fewer.

Some time elapsed before they noticed it. It was "Monsieur Désiré" who
called their attention to it by saying under his breath so that he could
be heard only by them:

"Hullo, where's the Nut?"

Then they began their search.

Their personal responsibility was directly involved in this case. They
had no inclination to treat it as a joke. And when they made certain
that the Nut also had escaped, they fell into a sudden rage. Once more
they turned everything upside down and bullied the men in the dormitory,
uttering a thousand threats and oaths. They grew violent when a look
from "Monsieur Désiré" told them what they wanted to know.

His look pointed to a flagstone, and as the stone was not properly in
its place, and the seams were sprinkled with dust, they at once
discovered the secret. They ordered the flagstone to be cleared,
whereupon the cavity lay open before them. One of them descended into
it, requesting the other to remain at his post.

Almost at once the echo of two, three, four shots was heard. The warder
running forward in the little tunnel was firing on the fugitives.

The entire staff of the Penitentiary Administration was called into
action. By the Lieutenant's orders the clerical staff telephoned to the
deputy-chiefs on the other islands, informing them of the escape of six
convicts, and instructing them to take the necessary measures to
recapture them before they could, by some unforeseen means, reach the
mainland.

The gun on the roof of the tower which dominated the penitentiary huts
on Devil's Island, placed in position at the time of Dreyfus's
imprisonment, was fired, thus proclaiming that the roadstead was closed.

All the convict guards and forces in the islands which the authorities
had at their command were set to work hunting for the absent men.

The Inspecting Officer, whom the "lifers" had nicknamed "Haversack,"
threw himself into the fray with furious ardor; and his exasperation was
entirely comprehensible, for Chéri-Bibi had already played tricks on
him; but the peculiar incidents of this last trick which had been
carried out under his very nose were more than he could bear. The
miscreant had killed Tarasque by the light of his cigar!

He worked himself up into a fury when, on returning from his rounds in
the dormitories, he learned that other convicts had followed Chéri-Bibi
in his flight, while nothing was known of the means by which they had
escaped.

He went with his men to meet the Commandant, who had finished his
beating-up of the game and, like himself, had not obtained a glimpse of
even Chéri-Bibi's shadow. Of course no one now believed in his death.

When the Commandant was informed of the extent of the disaster, he
exclaimed to the Lieutenant:

"We must warn Cayenne, Kourou, Sinnamarie, St. Laurent and the other
stations on the coast. I look upon it as most unfortunate, but we
mustn't lose time. The convicts must have felt certain of being able to
leave the roadstead or they wouldn't have attempted such a stroke, and
possibly they have made terms with some vessel passing through. What's
that Dutch schooner which dropped anchor off the harbor last night?
Perhaps she has lowered a boat, or perhaps the men have joined some
small craft by swimming out to her."

"Let's hope the sharks will get 'em!" returned the Lieutenant.

"Meantime, while we are looking for Chéri-Bibi here, the other convicts
have probably already got outside our waters. Go and telephone to
Cayenne and Kourou at once."

"I suggest, Commandant, that it might be better while our people are
telephoning to Cayenne for me to go in the motor-launch to the mainland.
I should get to Kourou very quickly, for it is only about eight miles
from here, and I could convey orders to Sinnamarie and St. Laurent, and
see personally that the steps which have to be taken are carried out.
Not forgetting that if I meet our 'jail-birds' on the way I can bring
them back to you at once."

"I agree. Take a couple of well-armed overseers with you, and shoot at
sight anyone you may meet who refuses to obey orders."

The Lieutenant saluted and hurriedly made for the jetty.

We left the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker hiding in the
fore deck-house on the launch. They still remained there in a frame of
mind that it is easy to picture. Sufficient time had elapsed for them to
realize that their escape was no longer a secret to anyone. The
commotion in the island, the galloping of patrols, and finally the
firing of the gun on Devil's Island, sufficed to put them in possession
of the facts.

"We're badly done," the Burglar said aloud. "There's no hope for us with
this caboodle as we can't make her go. If Chéri-Bibi and the Nut turn
up we may be able to come to an understanding."

Instead of Chéri-Bibi and the Nut they saw the Lieutenant and two
warders, armed to the teeth, hurrying towards them. The three men
boarded the launch.

The runaways had not stirred. In the pitchy darkness which shrouded them
they might hope to escape observation for a while. Their last chance
depended upon none of the men coming in to the deck-house for a length
of rope or any article necessary for the working of the launch.

They held their breath. Fortunately for them the engineer was not on
board and the officer would have to put off without him. He would have
his hands full attending to the engine during the journey. He had
already taken from his pocket the special part of the machinery and
placed it in position.

The convicts had more to fear from the warders, but at the word of
command the latter climbed to the top of the deck-house, where they
remained, rifle in hand, keeping watch, and peering into the night. The
convicts could hear the sound of their movements above them.

The officer himself unmoored the chains and threw them into the
deck-house, where they fell on the Burglar and the Joker, who did not
dare even to make an exclamation!

And the launch put off.

They first sailed round the island at full speed. Obviously the officer
had no intention of leaving those waters without first making this
circular tour which might, if he had the least luck and discovered
anything unusual, put him on the track of the fugitives or reveal to him
some part of their scheme.

Finding nothing suspicious, he returned to the roadstead, hailed the
Dutch schooner, jumped aboard her, and quickly learned that all was in
order and that her ship's boat and dinghy had not been lowered. After
exchanging a few words with the captain he returned to the launch.

During his short absence the four convicts were greatly tempted to dash
out of their retreat and attack the warders.

But it would have been a risky enterprise, offering very little prospect
of success. The warders were armed and would have shot them down like
dogs. Moreover, it would have been difficult to take them by surprise.
At the least sound coming from below they would have been on their guard
and realized that the game for which they were to go hunting so far away
was close at hand! Not to mention that they were in the roadstead and
assistance would be forthcoming immediately. If the convicts wished v to
attempt an onset of that character it would be better to wait until they
were under way.

The launch was now steering for the mainland and fast leaving the
islands behind her.

The crossing was rapid. The launch cut through the water in excellent
style. No incident occurred during the brief passage.

The adventure was shaping so splendidly for the four convicts that they
had but to let things take their course. They would very soon see what
was what. An immense hope began to dawn in them.

The launch came-to alongside the pontoon at Kourou. It was here that the
drama for the Parisian and his gang would reach its climax. They were
nearing the crucial moment.

The chains with which the launch was moored were in the deck-house,
resting on the convicts' knees! Could they suppose that the officer and
the warders would lay hold of them without discovering the men in their
lair?

They had every reason to hope so, because the ends of the chains were
outside the deck-house, and all the warders had to do was to stoop and
pick up these ends and the rest of the chains would be at their
disposal. That was what actually did happen.

A warder stooped and even turned his head towards the retreat in which
the miscreants stood ready to leap forth at the least incident, but he
failed to observe them.

The officer, as was his custom, made the engine unworkable by removing
the special part, and after mooring the launch, climbed on to the
pontoon, ordering his two men to follow him. The three of them soon
vanished into the darkness.

The Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker heaved a tremendous
sigh of relief. During the last half-hour they had scarcely dared to
breathe.

The Burglar took off his cap, and bowing in the direction taken by the
"Haversack," said with an intonation of mingled excitement and
gratitude: "Good-by, and thank you."

Soon they were crouching on the pontoon on the look-out for the guard
who was stationed at this point. As they could not see him, they partly
rose and began to run for the shore, when suddenly they heard behind
them loud shouts and the order to halt.

Of course they ran for all they were worth. A shot was fired after them.

"Look out," grunted the Parisian. "Now for the forest, and in less than
no time!"




CHAPTER VI

PERNAMBOUC, THE PRISON EXECUTIONER


Though the warder was taking pot-shots at them, Chéri-Bibi and the Nut
had received too great a start to run any risk of being hit. When, a few
minutes later, the warder came to the outlet of the tunnel through which
the six convicts had escaped, he set up a music which may be imagined.

The two convicts found that they were cut off from the road to the
jetty, and were obliged to fall back into a small wood of tall forest
trees.

They strove again and again to get back to the mass of high rocks on the
beach, but all their attempts to do so were discovered, and it was with
a feeling of gloomy despair that Chéri-Bibi, who did not know that the
launch had left the jetty, was fain to relinquish the idea.

The warders started again with renewed vigor to search the wood. They
fired their rifles and revolvers into the trees on the off chance. They
cursed and swore in their wrath.

Their imprecations were leveled at Chéri-Bibi, who had so often given
them trouble, and whom they had never been able to capture when once he
had taken to his heels. It was always he who, after a few weeks' stay in
the forest, gave himself up as a prisoner.

The escape of convicts, especially on the mainland, was somewhat
frequent. The old offenders imprisoned there were subjected to a
vigilance which was less strict, and, like Chéri-Bibi, they disappeared
for a time and then returned of their own free will, having finished
what they called their "short holiday." They had taken the opportunity
to scrape together a little gold dust in localities known only to
themselves, and then, weary of the terrible life in the forest and its
manifold dangers, they returned to take their places in the penal
settlement.

Search them as the warders might, nothing was ever found on them. They
were up to all sorts of extraordinary and unsuspected tricks for hiding
the gold dust which enabled them to buy certain luxuries in Cayenne and
in the wood-cutting establishments.

But how did Chéri-Bibi get away from the islands without falling a prey
to the sharks which infested those waters?

At any rate, on this occasion the warders were pretty well certain that
he was still on the island. They had caught sight of him and the Nut at
the moment when they were taking refuge in the forest.

"Let's go to the coal depot," whispered Chéri-Bibi to the Nut,
realizing that they were being surrounded.

The naval authorities kept a huge stock of coal in the Îles du Salut.
Chéri-Bibi had more than once found a safe retreat there. In order to
discover a man hiding in an immense store of coal and compressed fuel,
the entire mass would have to be turned upside down and removed.

During the hours when the convicts were "resting," and were less subject
to supervision, Chéri-Bibi was wont to make his way to the depot and
dig out passages and recesses known only to himself and undreamt of by
any one else. Such places would always come in handy one day or the
other. The time had arrived to take advantage of them once more. To
reach the place, without hindrance if possible, he went the longest way
round, making a wide sweep behind the victualling department.

He stopped to take breath, and then skirting the "sugar-loaf" of the
island, finally arrived at the coal store.

But, curse it all, the depot was surrounded by a body of warders who
were guarding the approaches. It was evident that experience of past
escapes had put the authorities on the alert. Nothing was to be done in
that quarter.

Chéri-Bibi uttered an oath, and as he swore a flash pierced the
darkness and a bullet whistled between him and the Nut.

Once again their presence had been detected.

In this way they were chased, by degrees, all over the island, until
they reached the main buildings in which were imprisoned men who had
refused to obey the warders, or been sentenced by the local courts.

Here, notwithstanding that a stronger force of men than usual was posted
on guard, the doors were kept locked. That evening, however, one door
was ajar and Chéri-Bibi and the Nut slipped through it. On this door
was painted in black letters the one word: "_Guillotine._"

Chéri-Bibi and the Nut did not find themselves alone. Two bodies and two
heads lay in a basket; two heads which had fallen that very
morning. . . .

And then Pernambouc, the prison executioner, came in, closing the door
after him.

He was in a merry mood.

He had returned from the canteen where he had been entertaining his
friends. He had been standing treat to them throughout the day. He was
very pleased with himself.

Pernambouc was a man of a cheerful disposition, and he found that life
had its pleasant side. The pleasant side of life for him was the
execution of other men.

Therefore Pernambouc was singing:


"_I go to Trouville, to Etretat,
I cut a dash like President Faure
I go about like the head of the State_----"


He did not complete the verse. He turned round, and by the red gleam of
a lantern slung on the wall he recognized Chéri-Bibi and the Nut.

He did not utter a cry nor make a movement. He only regretted his
omission to close the door when he first went out, and he stood waiting.

Chéri-Bibi was not long in coming to the point.

"Look here, there's a chance for you to make a bit. Instead of placing
those bodies in your sack and throwing them, as you always do, off the
jetty, put us, the Nut and me, in sacks one after the other and drop us
into the sea in the ordinary way, but as near as you can to the
'Haversack's' launch. Do you follow me?"

"How much?" asked Pernambouc.

Chéri-Bibi undid the lining in the waistband of his trousers and took
out something which glittered. Pernambouc unhooked the lantern from the
wall and bent over the shining substance.

"I'll give you half this gold dust," said Chéri-Bibi.

"I want the lot," returned Pernambouc.

Chéri-Bibi offered to give him half then for carrying the Nut first,
and the other half when he came back to fetch him.

"That's a fair proposal," said Pernambouc. "All right, my lord. But what
am I going to do with my corpses?"

"You've only got to bury them here. You can easily find a way of getting
rid of them. In the meantime you needn't be afraid they'll come to life
again."

A minute later the Nut, quivering in body and soul, slipped into the
loathsome sack intended for one of the guillotined men.

Pernambouc hoisted it on his shoulders.

The warder, whose absence from the jetty Chéri-Bibi had observed at the
beginning of his flight, had hurriedly taken up his post as soon as he
heard the first rumors of the convicts' escape. He, too, was in a merry
mood, and it may be that his gayety had received its inspiration from
the same source at which the worthy Pernambouc had refreshed himself.

The man caught sight of the executioner as he laboriously crept forward
with the sack on his bade. He went to meet him and asked facetiously:

"Is that shoddy goods heavy?"

"Yes; it's not as light as a feather," he returned. "I'm dying to get
rid of it."

"Fire away!" said the warder. "They're sure of 'the convicts' grave'
this evening. It's as though the sharks knew about it; for I've seen
them turning over and over near the jetty."

"Whereabouts?" asked Pernambouc.

"At the far end."

"I'm going to give 'em something for supper," said Pernambouc with a
hideous laugh.

"I'll come with you," said the warder in a sprightly tone.

As he went along Pernambouc became aware that the "Haversack's" launch
was no longer moored to the jetty. A grim laugh shook him from head to
foot.

Nevertheless he was not a bad sort of man. He had, as we have said, a
generous disposition, and when he was at the canteen he had no liking
for "drinking alone without standing treat;" but at the thought of the
face that the Nut would pull when, once in the water, he discovered that
the launch was on a trip and sharks were waiting for him, he could not
help roaring with laughter.

"Well, old man, are you satisfied with your little business?" asked the
warder.

"Yes," returned Pernambouc. "Things are not so bad. I've earned my pay
to-day. I'm very well pleased with myself."

When he came to the end of the jetty he laid his sack on the ground.

"Where did you see the sharks?"

The warder's presence somewhat inconvenienced him, but when the man
stooped over the water trying to catch a glimpse of the monsters in the
trough of the sea, Pernambouc made the most of the opportunity to throw
his sack down.

When the warder turned round at the sound which the sack made as it
struck the liquid element he could see only a dark mass which was lost
to view in the swirling foam. Almost immediately the waves were swollen
by another eddy a few feet away, and the leaping shadow of a huge
dog-fish glided over the luminous and phosphorescent sea and disappeared
in the direction of the Nut. Above the spot where he had fallen the
waters swished and seethed and then grew still.

"What a pity it's dark," exclaimed the warder. "We might have seen if
the sea is red."

"Oh, never fear," returned Pernambouc. "That's another one dead and in
his grave." And he walked away singing to himself:


"_I go to Trouville, to Etretat,
I cut a dash like President Faure,
I go about like the head of the State. . . .
The Nuts lost his, nut! . . . He'll swank no more!_"


But the Nut was not dead. Before he touched water he had ripped open the
sack with his knife.

He at once swam under water, making a vigorous effort to reach the spot
where he believed the launch was moored. . . . No launch was there!

But in her place a shark was swimming towards him, a shark who had
already turned on its back, its jaws wide open like a yawning gulf.

The Nut understood what tactics should be followed. They were the chief
topic of conversation during the time the convicts were "resting." He
dived and passed under the shark. The monster lost the scent and hunted
its prey on the other side of the jetty.

But what was he to do? From his position he could see the warder seated
on the top of the steps by which alone he could land on the jetty.

He dived again and swam under water, intending to get back as quickly as
he could to the beach, at the rear of the warder, by swimming round the
jetty if the sharks gave him sufficient time!

Not for a second did it enter his mind to surrender in order to get out
of his awful plight. Rather a thousand deaths than return again to the
life of the penal settlement. He might reach the beach in time to meet
Pernambouc with his new load, and save Chéri-Bibi from the terrible
danger to which he himself had been exposed. . . . They would hide
themselves once more. . . . And the launch would return.

He managed to swim round the jetty when the monster who missed him
before and was continuing the hunt, appeared in front of him, and once
more turning on its back glided towards him opening its voracious jaws.

It is this somewhat perplexing movement which the shark must make in
order to seize its prey that enables pearl fishers, for example, to work
in waters infested with them and, in most cases, to avoid them. As soon
as the brute turns on its back, the man plunges under it, and sometimes
he is quick enough to rip it open by a magnificent stroke of his knife,
a weapon which he invariably carries in his teeth.

The Nut had not sufficiently practised this sort of trial of skill to
think of anything but flight. He quickly retreated to the jetty and he
knew that on this side a large iron ring was affixed which was used for
mooring small craft. He clutched it with one hand, almost exhausted, his
exertions having made so great a demand upon his muscular power; and
before the brute was upon him he managed to seize the ring with both
hands and lift himself out of the water by the strength of his wrists.

The shark brushed against him as it passed under him, snapping its jaws
on the empty waters and vanishing in the obscurity.

Meantime Pernambouc returned to fetch Chéri-Bibi, who had lived through
an agony of suspense. In his friendship, as in his love or hatred,
Chéri-Bibi was always in extremes. His heart had adopted the Nut. To be
conscious that the Nut was in danger was for him the cruellest of
torments.

When Pernambouc entered his hut he found him seated on the basket which
contained the bodies of the guillotined men. The lantern threw its beams
on a face that might well have struck dismay in the least sensitive.

So little sensitive as he was a shudder passed through Pernambouc.

"It worked very well," he threw at him without waiting to be questioned.

"Is the Nut on board the launch?" asked Chéri-Bibi.

"The Nut is on board the launch," returned Pernambouc, holding out the
second sack to Chéri-Bibi, and claiming from him the balance of the
gold dust.

A few minutes later Pernambouc appeared once more on the jetty
staggering under his immense burden. The warder lay drowsing on the
steps. Pernambouc had to jostle him slightly.

"Let me finish my job."

"Oh, that's number two," grunted the warder. "He looks heavier than the
first. Shall I give you a hand to swing him in?"

"Don't trouble. . . . Look here, go back a little way along the
jetty. . . . I thought I saw the Commandant over there. He's cursing
like mad, and turning the hole damn island upside down to-night."

"Is it a fact that Chéri-Bibi is dead?" asked the warder as he went up
the steps of the jetty.

"Oh, with a man like that you can never tell." So saying, Pernambouc
bundled the sack into the water, and it was swallowed up in a huge eddy.

Pernambouc had not gone far when a hollow exclamation came from the sea,
sending once more a shudder through him to the marrow: "_Fatalitas!_"

"What's that?" exclaimed the warder. "I thought I heard someone's
voice."

"You're imagining things to-night."

The warder did not persist. He was attracted by the distant throbbing of
the launch.

"Hullo, here's the Inspecting Officer back again," he exclaimed.

"Yes, yes," returned Pernambouc. "Here's the launch. And his day's work
finished, his duty performed, he went back to his dormitory like a
well-disciplined 'convict.'"

The Commandant had also caught the hum of the approaching launch. He
reached the jetty in time to receive the officer when he landed, and to
learn that his instructions had been carried out, but that no trace of
the fugitives had been seen.

"It's something very like witchcraft," exclaimed the Commandant as he
left the jetty with the officer. "We haven't discovered anything
either."

At that juncture the warder was not a little taken aback to see the
launch put off from the jetty without apparently any crew being on board
her. He shouted, called for help, and fired several shots at her on
chance. The officers rushing up in haste could scarcely believe their
own eyes.

Meantime Chéri-Bibi and the Nut had at last found each other, boarded
the launch, and reached the open sea. The engine was running to
perfection. They might consider themselves out of danger. Suddenly
Chéri-Bibi exclaimed:

"The barque!"

This was the sailing ship whose business it was to convey the convicts
to the various penitentiary establishments and to keep guard.

The coast was quite near. Nevertheless Chéri-Bibi and the Nut had
barely time to run the launch aground before the boat which was lowered
by the barque landed a body of warders who at once started firing on
them.

"We've got 'em; we've got 'em," they bellowed.

But it was not long before their pursuit was brought to a standstill.
They were obliged even to fall back, for they heard a crackling sound
all around them.

Chéri-Bibi had set fire to the forest.




CHAPTER VII

THE MYSTERIES OF THE PRIMEVAL FOREST


Chéri-bibi and the Nut had taken a serious step in entering the
primeval forest. How many convicts who had escaped and sought refuge in
it had found death; death in its most terrible form? They must needs
struggle against all and everything--hunger, fever, wild beasts and men.

It sometimes happened that men who were engaged in clearing a new part
of the forest came upon partly devoured remains of human bodies. That
was all that was left of an escape which had created some sensation at
the time of its occurrence.

None but a very old jail-bird regards the forest as a friend who would
defend and keep him. As we have said, more than one convict, weary of
its savage life, returned and gave himself up as a prisoner.

Nevertheless Chéri-Bibi said to the Nut:

"I know my forest. They can send every warder in the colony after us. I
defy them to capture us."

In order to keep back for a while the men who were pursuing them, he had
simply set fire to a great accumulation of trees of all sizes and
species which had been felled by the ax some months previously, and
which the burning hot tropical sun had entirely dried up. This mass
became in a few minutes like a gigantic furnace, which spread the blaze
to an entire quarter of the living forest, so that, perceiving the
extent of the conflagration, the Nut anxiously inquired if they would
not themselves fall victims to their own method of defense.

The wind which had arisen when darkness fell blew north and north-west,
and drove the flames towards Cayenne. The Nut, feeling instinctively
that animals were fleeing in the opposite direction, that is to say with
the wind behind them, tried to persuade Chéri-Bibi to turn towards the
north-east; but he stopped him with a word.

"That way we are bound to meet warders who must be preparing to bar our
passage. Do as I say, and don't let's leave the fire."

The Nut did as he said, thinking to himself that though they were almost
certain, of course, to avoid the warders by fleeing in this direction,
they ran considerable risk of being roasted alive. As a matter of fact
they felt that the greatest heat from the furnace was behind them.

Now they cut a caper.

"That's done it; we're saved," exclaimed Chéri-Bibi. And he pointed
through the tropical climbers which were already beginning to crackle
around them, to the crimson waters of a river.

"The river . . . the Kourou river!"

A few minutes later they swam across it.

"Look out for alligators!" cried Chéri-Bibi, and then immediately
afterwards sinking his voice: "Under water. . . . Put your mug under
water. . . . Warders about! . . . I prefer alligators."

At that moment a launch filled with warders sent in pursuit of them,
hove in sight at the bend of the river.

Hiding themselves in the thick of a mass of reeds and aquatic plants,
Chéri-Bibi and the Nut were obliged repeatedly to dive to avoid being
seen in the dazzling light of the conflagration, for the giant trees of
the ages-old forest seemed like prodigious candles uniting heaven and
earth in one glow and one illumination.

"Go ahead!" ordered the petty officer, and the launch speeded up the
river against the tide, and finally disappeared from view.

Chéri-Bibi and the Nut felt fairly certain that they had now thrown the
warders off the scent, for obviously they still believed that the two
men were at some point on the opposite bank of the river. Thus they
landed on the right bank, and leaving both the river and sea behind
them, plunged boldly into the heart of the jungle.

Chéri-Bibi seemed to be following some well thought-out plan, for he
interrupted their journey from time to time to take his bearings. Their
progress, moreover, had become extremely difficult, and the Nut made the
suggestion that they might now call a halt for a little sleep, and set
out again the next day.

Under the canopy of the high forest trees and in the dense entanglement
of creepers and parasitical vegetation of all sorts, they forged their
way in murky darkness.

"Have you anything to light a fire with?" said Chéri-Bibi in answer to
the Nut's proposal. "No, of course you haven't. Well, I've got three
matches left, and I needn't tell you that after our dip in the river
they won't light, so what then, old man? To go to sleep at night in the
forest without having a fire beside you is to stand a pretty good chance
of waking up in the jaws of a jaguar. Come on. We'll have a sleep during
the day."

Thus they moved on for the remainder of the night, conscious that if
they stopped to lie down they would close their eyes in utter
prostration.

Chéri-Bibi sought to encourage the Nut by telling him stupendous
stories of the jungle, so stupendous, in fact, that the Nut had some
difficulty in believing them. What strange tragedies and what legends of
mysterious and fabulous fortunes were associated with the gold-diggers!
. . . Meantime they were almost naked, and each carried a knife as his
sole weapon.

"As we've been walking for such a time, it can't be long now before we
come to the Pupa," said Chéri-Bibi.

"What's the Pupa?"

"It's a small river which flows into the Cayenne, and, of course, it
bars our route. We are bound to come up against it whether we go a
little farther one way or the other. So when we get there we shall be
able to see how we stand."

The Nut's feet were bleeding. He would have liked to take off the rough
shoes which were the regulation shoes served out by the Penitentiary
Administration; but Chéri-Bibi set his face against it.

"We're going through a forest which is full of rattlesnakes, old man,
and nothing is more poisonous than those reptiles. One bite is enough!
Make as much noise as you can as we go along so as to drive them
away--and keep your shoes on!"

They frequently used their knives to cut a path through the inextricable
tangle of undergrowth, and they made two staffs for themselves,
veritable boar spears, from a wood as hard as iron, called gun wood. As
they proceeded they beat the thickets right and left, and often heard
the spring of some wild animal as it took itself off in the darkness. At
length dawn suddenly broke.

Chéri-Bibi started to run. The Nut heard him shouting:

"The Pupa! . . . The Pupa!"

He managed to drag himself so far and dropped, at the end of his
endurance, before a stream whose cool waters lapped the clear rocks.
Chéri-Bibi lay flat with his face in the water drinking . . . drinking.
The Nut bent down and drank out of the same cup; and afterwards both
slept a dreamless sleep in the shade of the branches which overhung this
enchanting stream.

So overcome were they by sleep and exhaustion that they did not hear the
approach of four men somewhat noisily descending the bank of the river
which they too were longing to reach. When their eyes fell on
Chéri-Bibi and the Nut, the four men stopped with one accord. It was
the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker.

The delight of the four miscreants, when they saw before them, at their
mercy, the two beings whom they most hated in the world, knew no bounds.
They were armed with axes which they had seized together with some
food--already consumed, however--as they passed through a woodcutting
establishment near Kourou.

They had but to lift their arms and strike; and already the Parisian was
shaking his ax in the air and staring at the Nut with a look in his eyes
in which the craving for murder had already sent the blood. But the
Joker who had the coolest head among the gang, agreed with the Burglar,
who was the most cunning, that it was a matter that demanded
consideration. They dragged the Parisian and the Caid away, and there
was a council of war.

The result of the discussion was that the four convicts put off for a
while their treacherous attack. The Joker's line of argument was,
moreover, entirely convincing. It was no secret, he said, that
Chéri-Bibi possessed at some spot in the forest a hiding-place in which
he must certainly have taken the precaution, during his earlier
expeditions, to collect together such things as provisions and so forth
to prevent himself from dying of starvation. From all appearance the two
scantily dressed men, who lay overwhelmed with sleep, and defenseless,
had not yet reached any of those hiding-places. Would it not be better,
before disposing of them, to wait until they themselves had betrayed
their hoard to the men who, like the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid,
and the Joker, stood most in need of it?

Having made up their minds, they retraced their steps slightly towards
the north so as to be behind the two men when they resumed their
journey. But they kept to the banks of the Pupa, which were obviously
some sort of guide to Chéri-Bibi.

As a matter of fact, when Chéri-Bibi woke up, he first took his
bearings, and then roused the Nut from his heavy slumber, and both
followed the river bank, making for the south-west.

The Parisian and his gang did not lose sight of their movements. And
they had the satisfaction of seeing Chéri-Bibi halt at the foot of a
tall tree, lift a boulder, and dig the earth underneath with the point
of his wooden spear. The Nut lent him a hand. They seemed to work with
growing excitement. To those who were watching the scene, there could
not be the shadow of a doubt that at that spot stood the hiding-place in
which their treasure was concealed.

At last Chéri-Bibi stooped forward and after rummaging in the earth
began to pass sundry articles to the Nut.

The Burglar, who knew how to steal through the forest without making a
twig crackle just as he knew, in Paris, how to move about a flat at
night without stumbling against the furniture, had crept forward pretty
close to the two men without arousing suspicion, and was eagerly
watching the scene. To begin with, the hiding-place contained a kit-bag
full of articles which were of prime necessity. The Burglar heard
Chéri-Bibi enumerate them in a hoarse voice: a compass, a small
lantern, a saw, some tins of preserved meat, spices, two bottles of rum,
a pocket-lighter and tinder, and an iron box containing identity papers
which would enable a convict to return to France as an honest man.

"There are several honest men in that box," said Chéri-Bibi, with a
grunt of satisfaction. "You will be able to make your choice."

Then there was a bottle filled with a brownish liquid. It was an
antidote to the stings of snakes.

Chéri-Bibi had thought of everything; but undoubtedly the prize of the
collection was a large box from which he drew forth two hatchets for
felling trees, a rifle, a revolver, some ammunition and three dynamite
cartridges.

"It's all in first-rate condition, because I took the precaution of
covering the kit-bag and the box with a thick layer of bully-tree gum,"
observed Chéri-Bibi.

The Nut did not know how to express his delight. He burst into laughter.
For the first time since he had been in the penal settlement he laughed.
He had no suspicion, unhappy man, that not far away from him a pair of
eyes were fastened on those treasures and gleaming with covetousness.

Had the Burglar's three confederates been with him, possibly he might
not have wavered but fallen upon the two friends before they were in
possession of their weapons. Possibly--because Chéri-Bibi and the Nut,
even unarmed, were men to be feared.

They had by this time satisfied their hunger from a tin of preserved
meat, and Chéri-Bibi slung his rifle on his shoulder ready to set out
for the chase.

"Sharpen your teeth," he said; "I'm going to have a look round for your
dinner, and I can assure you that there won't be such a spread even at
the Commandant's table. But let's do a little fishing to start with."

"Are you going shooting and fishing at the same time?" inquired the Nut,
who since he had seen the good things at their disposal had forgotten
his troubles and was as light-hearted as a child.

"You'll soon see how I do my fishing," returned Chéri-Bibi.

He went up to the river bank and, handing his rifle to the Nut, took
from his precious kit-bag, which he had flung over his shoulders, a
dynamite cartridge. A minute later the cartridge exploded in the river,
and straightway dozens of fish, both big and small, floated on the
seething waters, belly upwards.

"Well, what do you say to some fried fish?"

"I'm sorry we've got rid of a dynamite cartridge. We've only two left."

"That's more than we shall want," returned Chéri-Bibi. "What's the use
of them if not for fishing? In the old days, when I amused myself by
going prospecting for gold in the forest, they came in handy, but now
I've no need of them, and I'll tell you why after dinner."

Chéri-Bibi began shooting, and had the good fortune to "bring down" a
tapir and a partridge. The partridge was the size of a chicken and the
tapir as big as a pony. In South America the flesh of the tapir is
considered one of the best among red meats; and with the fish which they
picked up on the surface of the water after the explosion of their
dynamite cartridge, their dinner could not fail to be an appetizing one.

They pitched their camp some three hundred feet from the Pupa under a
great forest tree, dug a hole, lighted a fire, and when the hole grew as
hot as an oven, slipped the skinned carcass of the tapir into it.

They ate their fill and drank the river water with a dash of rum in it.
At the finish Chéri-Bibi fished out of his bag some tobacco and they
smoked and chatted in great good humor.

The Nut regarded their mode of existence as perfect, and declared that
he could not understand the conduct of those escaped convicts who,
having had the unexpected good fortune to reach the forest, returned and
surrendered themselves as prisoners. Chéri-Bibi as he listened to him
gave a peculiar smile.

Night was coming on. An impressive silence reigned over the face of all
living things.

"Well," said Chéri-Bibi, speaking in an undertone as if he feared to be
overheard by the very trees. "Well, I, who love the forest, I tell you
that I cannot look upon it without a tremor, and particularly during
those hours, like the present, when it ceases to breathe. Its silence
terrifies me. . . . I've never been afraid of but two things--my knife
for others and the forest for myself. For the forest is like
myself. . . . Sometimes it wants to do good, and it is at those moments
that it slays. The forest is something like my elder sister. . . . I
love it very much and it loves me very much, and yet it would make an
end of me as it would make an end of anyone else, because when one is
born to commit murder there's no way out of it. Some crime is on foot at
the moment when one least suspects it. Be on your guard. You must never
take any risks. The forest is full of mysteries; full of fumes which
kill; of plants and animals which carry death in their breath. And then
there are other things besides plants and animals. . . . There,
listen . . ." snorted Chéri-Bibi, as he grasped his rifle and peered
into the gloom behind the Nut. "Didn't you hear?"

"No. . . . What was it?"

"A man's breathing."

Chéri-Bibi remained standing for several minutes with his ears pricked
up listening to the sounds of the forest, and then he came back and
seated himself again beside the fire and threw ashes over it.

"I assure you," he said, sinking his voice, "that something was
breathing not very far away from us, and that something was a man.
Perhaps it was a medicine-man who was passing and came up to have a look
at us. In any case, let's put out the fire, which throws too much light
around, and use the lantern. That will be enough to drive away wild
animals, while a big fire, you know, attracts any man who may be in the
neighborhood. . . . So you didn't hear anything? No, you can't tell.
Sure enough, there's only one wizard who would come so near. It's a pity
that Yoyo isn't here."

"Who or what's Yoyo?"

"Yoyo is undoubtedly the chief magician or medicine-man of the forest.
He's the man who taught me a thing or two! He has a cure for everything.
He can drive away evil spirits. . . . And he gave me the antidote for
the stings of snakes. I'll introduce you to him in three or four days'
march from her. He's an Indian who comes from the Emmerillons, and he
and his family just managed to escape being eaten by a savage tribe--the
Roncouyennes."

"Even though he's a magician?"

"Oh, in those days he was only an apprentice magician. He hadn't passed
his examinations!"

"Do magicians have to pass examinations?"

"The Indians about here call their medicine-men _piayes._ A goodly
number of them claim to be _piayes_, but if they are not the real
article they do not impose on anyone. There are certain recognized tests
by which it is impossible to mistake a genuine _piaye._ Such a man knows
how at a given time to make a tiger or jaguar obey him. You must
understand that these men are familiar with every scent and plant, and
the peculiar detritus with which they have to sow the track of these
animals in order to make them come to the place to which they wish them
to come."

"Is Yoyo a friend?"

"A very great friend. It was I who saved him from death. And ever since
then he and his brothers have worked for me in a secret place in the
forest. A great quantity of gold is stored in that place; more gold,
perhaps, than you would be able to carry away with you."

Chéri-Bibi mounted guard during the night and looked after the Nut as
though he were a child. He managed to rig him up a crude sort of hammock
by twisting together a number of creepers and suspending them to a tree.
It served to protect the Nut from the excruciating stings of the
innumerable ants which constitute the mortal plague of Guiana at night
time. Next morning the Nut could not be sufficiently grateful, nor did
he know how to express the feelings of friendship with which his heart
was overflowing. He was quite at a loss.

"Never mind about that," said Chéri-Bibi, as they broke camp. "That's a
matter between me and the good Lord. He has been rather hard upon me,
and we have not always got on well together. But the good Lord allowed
you to cross my path, and I am thankful for it. You know that in my
particular sphere of life, one doesn't come across a mug like yours
every day. Yours is not the mug of a bad lot. That's all. I like you
because I've often seen you grieving and calling out for your mother
like a kid, and because you're a white man, with the soul of a priest.
You give me peace, in fact. Enough, we'll say no more about it. . . .
And then you must know one thing, old man--everything that I have is
yours. My life, my gold--everything. My life will be useful to you here,
and my gold will be useful to you in Europe. I have a fair quantity of
it. . . .

"Yoyo alone knows where I keep it. We must continue our way day and
night. I shan't be easy in my mind until we meet Yoyo. The other
medicine-men are afraid of him, and the redskins from Taheca to
Paramacuas obey him. Yoloch, the native devil, and Goudon, the native
god, are devoted to him. He rules the forest."

"Where is Yoyo?" asked the Nut.

"In a part of the forest which very few people except his family and
myself know, I promise you. . . . However, nearly every Sunday he comes
to do a little marketing at Sanda's bar and store in the village where
the gold-diggers live."

They pushed rapidly forward during the next two days and nights. Every
now and then they met natives, who greeted them with the usual
civilities but kept their distance.

"_Hodeo._" ("Good day.")

"_Akonno, Feî-de-ba?_" ("Thank you, how are you?")

"_Li vacca bouilleba._" ("Traveling is pleasant, thanks be to Heaven.")

"_Diafonno._" ("May your journey continue prosperous!")

Sometimes they encountered natives who were able to speak French fairly
well. The Nut could not help expressing his astonishment.

"They mix in high circles, my dear fellow," explained Chéri-Bibi.
"They're regular frequenters of the wood-cutting establishments and the
penal settlements on the coast. Yoyo speaks French as well as you or I."

Other natives jabbered a mixture of French and Pupian which was not
without its humor.

"How _lifika?_ (How are things?")

The Nut asked Chéri-Bibi if it were true, as was declared, that certain
tribes in Guiana practiced cannibalism.

Chéri-Bibi nodded his head.

"There are some. There are not many, but there are a few when the
opportunity for a good 'feast' offers itself--you follow me--and we
can't bear them any grudge for it. From what I hear, it's not so very
bad. . . . In general, the natives are quite decent sorts if the
medicine-men do not egg them on. But there are tribes who work only with
these 'feasts' in view. They don't live in these parts, but much farther
away, near Pelzgoudars. Yoyo told me that in that district you must take
no risks. . . . Those people are fond of tasty dishes!"

"What about the terrible tribe of Oyaricoulets?"

"I can tell you that I've never seen the tribe of Oyaricoulets, and I
really believe that those who talk the most about them haven't seen them
any more than I have. Still, one can never tell. The jungle is a world
to itself, and we must never be astonished at anything. The story runs
that these people have big ears resembling the ears of donkeys, and
enormously long legs. They're giants, in fact. They climb trees like
monkeys. They are said to be armed with bows as big as my arm, which
carry an incredible distance, and of course they 'eat' the stranger
within their gates. It's said, too, that they have noses as big as a
macaw's beak. Stuff and nonsense!"

About eleven o'clock on their third night, Chéri-Bibi fell asleep,
utterly done up, and the Nut was mounting guard. With rifle in hand he
listened to the weird night noises of the forest, and often he gave a
start, imagining that he heard a stirring in the underwood, and even, as
Chéri-Bibi said, a man's breathing.

Once or twice he got up to make a tour of the camp, stopping with ears
on the alert, and taking a step forward only with the greatest caution.
Chéri-Bibi's stories of forest witchcraft were like an obsession on his
restless mind.

Several times he stared into the darkness ready to fire; and then he
laughed at his childish fears and came back and sat down beside
Chéri-Bibi.

Nearly an hour passed in this way. Suddenly there was a very distinct
creaking, as of some body bearing down upon making its way through the
undergrowth. And then he caught a sigh--it was very distinctly a breath,
for it was something more than a sigh--like a human whisper.

The Nut shook Chéri-Bibi who, however, slept on. He reproached himself
for trying to awaken him from his heavy slumber; and so as to make sure
that he was not the victim of his over-excited nerves, he stole, with
rifle at the ready, towards the sound which he fancied he had heard.

The noise was repeated, but it seemed to be moving away.

The Nut went forward boldly, and suddenly emerged into a small clearing,
in the center of which was a native on his knees with arms upraised in
the shining moon, sighing and, seemingly, giving himself up to
infinitely sad incantations.

It was an Indian clad simply in the skin of a carnivora. His face was
curiously tattooed, while his long hair was parted in the middle. His
eyes gleamed in the dusk like the luminous eyes of an animal while he
sobbed forth his muffled and singular litany wherein ever and anon
occurred the refrain: "Galatha! Galatha! Galatha!"

He failed to perceive the Nut, who stood hidden behind a tree. "That's a
magician, a _piaye_, who is calling upon Yoloch or Goudon," said the Nut
to himself. But he had no desire to break in upon the man's
supplications.

Suddenly the _piaye_ was surrounded by a band of infuriated redskins,
whose leaping shadows appeared enormous to the Nut and filled him with
affright. They seemed to be bounding as high as the trees, and the play
of the moonlight through the branches lent itself to the fancies of a
man who had been listening all day to exciting and fantastic stories of
the forest.

He fled, convinced that he had seen the Oyaricoulets, and he gave no
rest to Chéri-Bibi until he allowed himself to be dragged away still
half asleep. At last when he was entirely awake in the early morning,
and the dreaded country was left far behind, he said:

"Tell me what you saw."

"I saw the Oyaricoulets."

"But what else?"

"They were preparing to commit every sort of crime, and dancing like
madmen round a magician who broke forth into frightful lamentations,
crying 'Galatha! Galatha!'"

"Well, it was some poor man who was mourning the death of his wife, his
_galatha._ And you were witnessing a sort of mass for the repose of her
soul. . . . May Goudon protect her and defend us from Yoloch! It takes
very little to astonish you."

During the remainder of the day Chéri-Bibi gave particular attention to
the physical features of the country through which they were passing. In
the afternoon his face lit up with a smile; and the Nut surmised that
all was as well as well could be with them.

They left the Pupa and were following the course of another river which
flowed towards the north-east. Strangely enough the forest was no longer
inimical to them. Everything, on the contrary, seemed to assist them in
their purpose. They came across a path which enabled them to cover a
considerable tract of ground without unduly fatiguing themselves.

At last, in the evening, they reached the top of a wooded height, from
which Chéri-Bibi could point out to the Nut the gold diggings and the
village in which the prospectors lived.




CHAPTER VIII

THE GOLD-SEEKERS


The bar and store which Señor Sanda had set up in the heart of the
gold-prospecting district stood on the banks of a stream which, some
three days' march farther on emptied itself into the Oyapok, a river
which constituted the frontier between French Guiana and Brazil. The bar
was an establishment similar to those, called _albacen_, which are to be
found in the forest solitudes of Gran Chaco.

Here everything was sold that could be of use to the worker in the
forest--tools, provisions, preserves, tinware, clothes, arms, munitions
and every variety of alcohol. It was at once a bar and a grocer's shop.
It was likewise a gaming-house. Men entered it with their pockets well
filled with gold dust, and left it to work in the "sluices," having lost
their all. Other men quickly made a fortune, but they did not keep it
long. Truth to tell, Señor Sanda was the only man in the place who grew
rich.

One Sunday, in the large saloon bar, constructed of wooden planks with a
corrugated iron roof, men were having an exciting game at the table, at
the far end of the room, near the counter behind which Sanda, assisted
by his "boys," was serving out rum and Indian spirits to chance
customers.

At the gaming-table gold dust passed from one hand to another, and
little bags were emptied on the turn of the dice or filled to an
accompaniment of shouts, protests and a general uproar, which were
followed suddenly by intervals of intense silence.

Near the door the Parisian, the Burglar, the Caid and the Joker were
seated at a table with a bottle before them. They were chatting somewhat
furtively as they eyed, by turns, the proprietor, new arrivals as they
came in, and the table at the other end at which a mad game was in
progress.

"We might imagine ourselves at the Jockey Club," said the Joker.

"You dry up," said the Parisian.

The four men had no gold dust. They were penniless, but they were in
possession of an important secret which had brought them to that village
and filled them with a dim but splendid hope. They had overheard
Chéri-Bibi and the Nut's conversation about Yoyo and his hoard of gold.

Consequently they had performed surprising feats, marching day and night
in order to arrive at the diggings before the two men.

During the last twenty-four hours they had been hunting, without
success, for Yoyo. At last they ran aground at Sanda's bar, and were now
seated with a bottle in front of them for which, seemingly, they would
find some difficulty in paying.

Suddenly the Parisian stood up and said:

"Don't you trouble about me, but go on with your chatter." And he showed
them a set of dice with which they were quite familiar.

He went to have a look at the men at the gaming-table where a certain
amount of disorder reigned. The men were arguing about a throw of the
dice. The Parisian forked out a piece of linen which might possibly have
been a handkerchief with a knot at the end of it containing an
appreciable quantity of the precious metal.

He took a hand in the game.

His first victim was a woolly-headed half-breed, who came from the
diggings with a well-lined belt. Half an hour later he had lost the lot.
He swore, for that matter, that he had been robbed, and the quarrel was
about to lead to blows, for two other diggers had come in and taken
sides against the Parisian, when Señor Sanda stepped between them and
declared that he only allowed gentlemen who were above suspicion to
enter his place. Sanda exercised absolute authority. He could expel from
his gaming club anyone who failed to meet his approval without having to
consult any committee of management.

The Parisian, in the manner of a great aristocrat, at once ordered the
most expensive drinks and invited everyone to have a drink with him,
paying a large sum in advance to Señor Sanda without moving a muscle of
his face. Then the Parisian, as he had foreseen, was favored with
Sanda's smile, and the sound of the dear man's voice was as pleasant to
hear as the gold dust was pleasant to look upon.

The Burglar, the Caid and the Joker joined them and took part, as may
well be imagined, in the general carouse.

"I've unloosened the tongue of the pub-keeper," said the Parisian. "We
must try to make the most of it."

The Parisian poured the gold dust which he had won into his wide-brimmed
felt hat, and letting it run through his fingers, said to Sanda:

"Poor beggars! I've probably taken the result of six months' work away
from them."

"Oh, not many of them make their fortunes in the diggings apart from a
few Indians who discover a real vein and hide themselves from Europeans
as though they were the plague . . ." returned Sanda. "See that man
passing over there?"

"Where?"

"Opposite the bar. . . . That's a celebrated magician. He knows where
the gold is, does that man. . . . He's called Yoyo."

The Parisian made a dash for the window. He saw a man going past who was
in the full vigor of youth.

His appearance was somewhat startling, and even demoniacal. He wore his
hair plaited in little tresses. He had a fine figure and moved
gracefully. It would be difficult to withstand his flashing gaze.

The convicts kept their eyes fixed on him.

"He comes here to buy the necessaries for the _yaraqué_ feast, which is
the most important event of the year. The Indians carry through the
village their flags made of basket-work, which they fix on tall bamboos,
beat on their various drums, and play a sort of flute made from dead
men's bones."

At that moment one of the gamblers, who had procured a little gold,
challenged the Parisian to a fresh game. The Parisian imagined, from the
appearance of the saloon, that it would be difficult to refuse to play,
and he sat down once more opposite his partners; but, turning to the
Burglar and his chums, he threw a glance in the direction of Yoyo, who
was entering a hut on the other side of the street, and one of them went
out to follow the Indian's tracks.

In the meantime night had fallen quickly, and Chéri-Bibi and the Nut
had come in. They were feeling worn out, and did not stop in the village
until they reached Sanda's store.

When they entered the bar the proprietor and his customers were so
intent upon the game that their arrival passed entirely unobserved. They
went to a table some distance from the lamps, and threw their bags down
in a dark corner beside them.

Then Chéri-Bibi stood up to inspect some cooking utensils which were
hanging on the wall and which, on the way, he had decided to buy.

The Nut, overcome with fatigue, holding his head in his hands, did not
seem to have the strength to give an order. Nevertheless he turned his
head at the sounds which came from the other end of the room. Curses and
yells of fury went up against the turn of the dice. The Parisian
insolently continued to win.

Suddenly the Nut gave a start. Someone was speaking whose voice he
seemed to recognize, and yet it could not be.

He rose from the table and drew near the gamblers. The dice were thrown
again.

"Those dice are loaded!" a loud voice broke out.

The Nut, who had flung out the accusation, stared at the gambler with
blazing eyes. His heart was swelling with an unspeakable hatred. The
Parisian. . . . The Parisian was before his eyes. . . . The man who had
tortured him for such long years.

"That man has robbed you!"

The gamblers made a rush at the Parisian, but the Nut shook off the
human cluster which stood between him and his enemy.

"No, no. . . . Leave him to me," he cried. "This man is my affair. He
falls to my lot. Oh, how long I've waited for this moment!"

Chéri-Bibi tried in vain to intervene. The Parisian and the Nut, locked
in a deadly embrace, were rolling on the floor.

As soon as hostilities broke out Sanda saw that the affair would end in
a free fight and, as was his duty, sent one of his "boys" to warn the
headman of the place. And at the height of the struggle, as the Parisian
was gasping for breath under the pressure of the Nut's fingers, the
saloon was plunged into complete darkness. The Parisian's confederates
had put out the lamps. Someone shouted:

"Police!"

The police had, in fact, arrived. The lamps were lighted again, and it
was seen that the birds had flown. . . .

Sanda remarked to the headman:

"Fortunately for me, my customers pay in advance!"

Saved from the Nut's clutches by the cunning and devotion of his
friends, the Parisian soon recovered his senses, and in particular, his
perception of their position. The main thing for them was not to lose
sight of Yoyo.

The four convicts felt certain that Chéri-Bibi was unaware of the
medicine-man's appearance in the village, and it was with full
confidence in their scheme that they followed Yoyo's tracks as soon as
he once again made his way into the forest.

Yoyo led them during a part of the night into an almost impenetrable
wilderness; but when dawn broke they realized that they had lost trace
of him. For hours they endeavored, without avail, to recover the scent.
They held a consultation, and finally determined to return to the
village, for they ran some risk in that part of the jungle of losing
their way, which would mean death to them. . . .

At the village they would be able to buy such things as they stood in
need, particularly fire-arms, and leave the place and wait patiently
until Chéri-Bibi and the Nut passed the frontier into Brazil, for when
the two men came back from visiting Yoyo they would be laden with gold.
The Parisian and his gang were fully aware of the part of the coast from
which the Nut would attempt to sail for Europe. . . . The plan was
adopted with enthusiasm.

Meanwhile Chéri-Bibi and the Nut had also entered the forest.
Chéri-Bibi went forward with confidence owing to the landmarks which
had been set up some years before; and suddenly, as he was passing under
a giant tree, something fell into his arms. It was Yoyo--Yoyo, who,
perceiving that he was being followed, had climbed into a tree with the
agility of a monkey--Yoyo, who had recognized Chéri-Bibi.

The Nut was presented to him with due form and ceremony. Yoyo was a
medicine-man who seemed to be conversant with the usages of polite
society and to value them more than anything else.

"I'm the man who told him all about the benefits of civilization," said
Chéri-Bibi, with a touch of pride. Nevertheless, the presence
of a gang of undesirables in the neighborhood, to which he drew
attention--Chéri-Bibi recognized from Yoyo's description that he was
referring to the Parisian and his confederates--curtailed his
demonstrations of friendship, which the medicine-man's personality
rendered well-nigh sacred; and when Yoyo had expressed to Chéri-Bibi
how rejoiced his family would be to see him again, the three of them
plunged into the very depths of the Macuano country in which Yoyo lived.

When Chéri-Bibi and the Nut reached the place they received a very
touching welcome. The old mother, the young sister and brothers vied
with each other in their kindness to the new-comers. They served a
concoction for the evening meal which brought the tears to Chéri-Bibi's
eyes.

Never had fish and pimento been so tastily prepared for the convict's
palate, and he declared that he had never eaten anything so good, even
in the days when he was in hiding in a fisherman's hut in Martigny,
after a sorry story of an attempted murder of a gendarme, the
mock-heroic episodes of which he recalled not without a certain
whimsical humor.

The story was, it seemed, entirely in Chéri-Bibi's favor, for he had
taken upon himself to defend a young girl who appeared to be in some
danger; but the misfortune was that the jury suspected that the danger
came from Chéri-Bibi himself. And he concluded: "I expected that, but
when your conscience is clear you can afford to treat the rest as a good
joke."

The natives, who were extremely quick-witted, listened to Chéri-Bibi
with absorbed attention. The evening wore on in most agreeable fashion
as Chéri-Bibi indulged in his recollections as a criminal, for he
deferred the consideration of serious business to the morrow. As to the
Nut, he was like a man in a dream.

He no longer allowed himself to be astonished at anything. The most
amazing incidents seemed to him to be quite normal. He knew beforehand
that anything might happen to him, and, adopting Chéri-Bibi's
philosophy, was prepared for everything. A day or two ago it was the
penal settlement, convicts, warders; yesterday it was the fearsome
Oyaricoulets, and the not less fearsome Parisian; that night it was an
excellent dinner, winding up with stories of which the least that could
be said was that they were in keeping with the fantastic nature of the
events which were in store for them. To-morrow! What would happen
to-morrow. Oh, yes, Chéri-Bibi had promised him that to-morrow he would
be a millionaire!

And in very truth he did become a millionaire. After a good night's
rest, which was the first that they had passed in safety since their
departure from île Royale, Yoyo suggested to Chéri-Bibi that they
should set out with him. . . .

They came to a clear stream in which the medicine-man's brothers and
women-folk were engaged in obtaining gold by washing the alluvial
gravels.

It is well known that this particular region is one of the richest in
the world, and nearly every river contains gold in appreciable
quantities. But the difficulties which are involved in obtaining it, and
the impossibility for Europeans to live in the primeval forest, renders
the collection of the gold exceedingly arduous. To secure remunerative
results, large companies with considerable capital at their command are
necessary. The individual prospector who refuses to become a worker for
others is fated soon to be discouraged or to perish. In comparison with
the few who grow rich by a lucky accident, what great numbers go under!

The native can overcome these disadvantages. Nevertheless, when he has
discovered a lode, or some creek containing a larger amount of the metal
than usual, he is plundered, or rather, compulsorily dispossessed,
according to the rigor of the law of ownership established by white men.
Thus, learning from experience, he hides himself and works entirely
alone.

For many years Yoyo and his family had labored for Chéri-Bibi. What was
the nature of his tremendous services to them that they should become
his slaves? "I saved Yoyo's life," said Chéri-Bibi modestly. The truth
was that one day, when tired of the settlement, he escaped and was
taking a holiday on the Upper Oyapok, he saved the entire family from
destruction by a man-eating tribe. . . . "But that," as Kipling says,
"is another story."

Chéri-Bibi having given the signal, Yoyo led the way over a swamp,
concealed by bamboos. Undoubtedly they would have been engulfed in the
swamp but for stones which had been secretly laid down in the mire and
were scarcely visible, but which held them up as they walked across.

Each man had but to imitate the movements of Yoyo. One of his brothers
who, with a proud air, leaned on the handle of a pickaxe, was the last
to cross over. Thus they landed on an islet of moss-covered boulders
whose approach was guarded by this belt of mud. They made their way into
a narrow circular space surrounded by rising ground.

"Here we are!" exclaimed Yoyo.

He spoke a few quick words to his brother, who inserted his pick under a
stone of some considerable size which looked as if it were immovable,
but all the same it almost at once swung on a pivot, exposing to view a
crevice filled with thick moss.

The men shifted the moss and a leather bag could be seen. The magician
bent forward and untied the complicated fastenings. It was apparent,
that the bag was filled with gold dust. . . .

When, two days later, they crossed the Oyapok and, at the same time, the
Brazilian frontier, Chéri-Bibi heaved a deep sigh of relief, and said
to the Nut, pointing to the bag which Yoyo and one of his brothers had
carried so far, and to the landscape which lay before them:

"Fortune and liberty!"

"It is to you that I shall owe both. I shall never forget it."

The Nut had first refused to accept this royal gift. He could not
understand how it was that with such wealth, and friends like Yoyo,
Chéri-Bibi remained so long at the penal settlement and was quite ready
to go back to it.

"Come with me to Europe, or, if that is impossible, live here with
Yoyo," he entreated him. "Anything is better than life in the convict
settlement."

At first he received in reply merely one of those terrible grins which
placed an impassable gulf between Chéri-Bibi and mankind. Those who saw
that grin understood that something was on the other side of the abyss,
something entirely remote from them, apart from them, apart from
everything; some mysterious thing which they would never unravel, and
they did not persist.

Nevertheless a few minutes later Chéri-Bibi made an effort to enter
into an explanation for the Nut's benefit, to which he would never have
consented with anyone else. It seemed that the moment was not yet come
for Chéri-Bibi to see Europe once more. He had the most profound
reasons for his decision. Obviously he would amass a fortune before that
particular hour struck, but since it was still far distant, the Nut
could accept the gold with an easy conscience, inasmuch as Yoyo would
have ample time to collect together another hoard. In so far as the
penal settlement was concerned, Chéri-Bibi added, with a demoniacal
laugh, he should return to it by choice.

"Not forgetting that I cannot do without certain news which can only
reach me there."

Yoyo put an end to the discussion by announcing that the canoe, which
they required in order to descend the Oyapok, would be ready that
evening. He had bought one from the Indians. It was of fair size, hewn
in one piece from the trunk of a huge tree.

Yoyo steered her, seated in the stern, singing the while the plaintive
ballads of his country.

The journey proceeded without let or hindrance, and when they were
within a few miles of the sea they landed and made the rest of the way
by land in Brazilian territory, arriving thus at Cape Orange. At this
place there was an inn, which was well and favorably known in the
district for its admirable treatment of travelers. The proprietor did
not worry his customers by asking them indiscreet questions as to whence
they came, nor as to their previous careers, which usually had brought
them, more or less, in contact with the police. Moreover, the landlord,
who was called Fernandez, was a friend of Chéri-Bibi's.

An exuberant delight bubbled over his truculent features when his eyes
fell upon him.

"Oh, here's the 'Shower,'" he said.

This was his name for Chéri-Bibi, who became by accident one of his
customers and whom he did not know in any other way. One day Chéri-Bibi
got him out of his difficulties, when he was well nigh bankrupt and in
the slough of despair, by literally showering bank-notes on him, which
Fernandez accepted without asking whence they came.

Chéri-Bibi, therefore, had a friend in Fernandez who was almost as
devoted to him as Yoyo, and upon whom he could rely when he needed him.
A man who kept an inn on the outskirts of the forest, over the frontier,
could not fail to be useful to a "convict on the march." Chéri-Bibi
maintained that here again he had done a good stroke of business for
himself.

Fernandez's household consisted of his wife, who was still a handsome
woman, and two graceful and sprightly young daughters who, at their
father's bidding, paid their respects to Chéri-Bibi and proceeded to
prepare a special supper.

"Business getting on all right?" asked Chéri-Bibi when they were all
together in Fernandez's private room with a bottle of golden wine before
them.

"Bless me, yes," he returned. "What with convicts, gold-diggers,
smugglers and pirates I hold my own."

The Nut asked for news of the great war.

"Very unsatisfactory for France," said Fernandez, shaking his head. "But
the steamer which puts in here to-morrow morning may bring us better
news."

"I thought that the boat from the Antilles did not reach here for
another week," said Chéri-Bibi.

"That's true," returned Fernandez, "but a boat now starts from
Martinique, and calls at the ports along the coast on dates announced
beforehand. She has to pick up Frenchmen of military age coming from the
interior to join up."

Chéri-Bibi turned to the Nut.

"That's just the very thing to meet the wishes of my friend Didier
d'Haumont, who has left his business on the Upper Oyapok--a very fine
and prosperous business--to go back to France and do his duty. Only, old
chap, Didier d'Haumont came away in such a tearing hurry that he
absolutely forgot to bring his wardrobe with him. As I know you always
have these things on hand, I hope that he won't be much the worse for
it."

"Your friend will be able to get anything he wants here," returned
Fernandez, bowing to the Nut with every mark of politeness.

"That's all right then. You'll go with my friend to the ship, of
course?"

"Your friend won't need any help but mine, and I'll introduce him to
Captain Lalouette, an old acquaintance, who will be very glad to be of
service to him."

"So that's settled," said Chéri-Bibi, bluntly, concealing his emotion.
"But what's happened to our friend Yoyo?"

At that moment Yoyo came into the room. Chéri-Bibi must have read some
uneasiness in the expression of his face for he asked him what was the
matter.

"Nothing; all goes well," replied Yoyo somewhat laconically.

They sat down to supper, which grew very lively. The hostess and her
daughters made themselves agreeable. Chéri-Bibi was the most exuberant
of the party. He did not eat, he devoured his food. Moreover, he drank
to excess. He who prided himself on having maintained throughout his
adventurous career the greatest abstemiousness and showed an abstainer's
contempt for drunkards, continually held out his glass, and kept level
with Fernandez, who was considered the hardest drinker on the coast.

The Nut alone neither ate nor drank. But he was no more astonished at
anything Chéri-Bibi did than Chéri-Bibi was astonished at his doings.
They both knew quite well what this excessive eating and drinking on the
one hand, and this complete abstinence on the other really meant, and
that it had its origin in both cases in the thought which never left
their minds, that the following night, at that particular hour, they
would have said good-bye to each other with very considerable chances of
never meeting again.

Ten years side by side in a convict settlement bring about frightful
hatreds, or friendships which depend upon something almost higher than
liking, and create a bond of moral unity, as it were, which does not
break without some excruciating wrench.

Convicts have been known to die rather than to allow themselves to be
parted. And it might be that if suicide had not been forbidden to
Chéri-Bibi for reasons which we shall know one day, that supper night
at Fernandez's inn might, by his own desperate act, have been his last.
For that matter it was almost equally fatal to him though not by any
design of his own.

He had judged rightly when he read on Yoyo's face some degree of
uneasiness. During the meal Yoyo often left the room. First he subjected
the more or less pallid faces in the ordinary bar to a scrutiny, and
then he strolled round the house.

The starting point of his secret agitation was the squawk of a paroquet
which scarcely ever left them as they sailed down the Oyapok. They were
near the forest in which these birds abound, and it was to some extent
natural that they should hear them, but the inn was a considerable
distance from the forest. Moreover, certain shadowy movements round the
inn almost level with the ground seemed to Yoyo suspicious. He climbed
to the balcony, mounting quickly and coming down almost immediately.
This time obviously there was an end to his doubts.

Some hours later when everyone seemed to be asleep in the inn, the
Burglar broke open the door of the yard with a cleverness and quickness
which impressed even his confederates, and accompanied by them effected
an entrance into the inn. They crept forward with the greatest caution.

Suddenly they were stopped short by a loud burst of laughter which
startled the silence of the night. Oh, they recognized that laugh! And,
as the phrase goes, they took themselves off. They beat a retreat with a
haste that caused them to knock their heads against the door which a few
minutes before they had opened and which was now closed. At that moment
a fusillade burst around them.

They performed wonders in their effort to get away from the infernal inn
in which they expected to take their victims by surprise, but were so
nicely cornered. By extraordinary agility they managed to climb to the
top of a wall and drop to the other side at the risk of breaking their
necks. Nevertheless, they lost a few of their feathers; and the next
morning the extent of their downfall was apparent in the traces which
they left behind--traces of blood.

"All the same," said Chéri-Bibi in confidence to Fernandez, "you'll now
understand how necessary it is for me to stay in the country until they
are collared with me--just to keep my eye on them, at close quarters, so
that they don't do any harm to my friend the Nut. . . ."




CHAPTER IX

CHÉRI-BIBI AND THE NUT SAY GOOD-BYE


When the steamer was in the roadstead and the time came for Chéri-Bibi
and the Nut to say good-bye, no words were wasted by them. It was a
moment of great simplicity, for though out of the fullness of the heart
the mouth speaketh--_pectus est quod disertes facit_--yet the heart may
be too full for words.

Chéri-Bibi, as may be imagined, after so many vicissitudes presented a
very disordered appearance which was not, however, altogether unsuited
to him. Hardly anything remained of his old clothes but his leather
trousers and a worn-out scrap of coarse canvas with which he managed to
conceal certain peculiar tattoo-marks which were not the work of any
native of Guiana.

Thus, as may be imagined, his appearance was the antithesis of the
Nut's, who had just put on a new suit of clothes of the latest Parisian
fashion which had come from Rio a few weeks earlier.

When the Nut entered the room in which Chéri-Bibi was waiting for him
in intense silence, the latter at first failed to recognize him. A man
of fashion stood before him. Nevertheless, Chéri-Bibi had known men of
fashion before, not only because he used to keep their company and help
them on their passage from life to death, but because for a certain time
he was a man of fashion himself. But the Nut took his breath away.

By Jove, the Nut was a man of breeding! At the sight of such a
remarkable transformation, Chéri-Bibi's heart, which was bursting with
grief, was filled with pride; he was proud of his pal, so that the
combination of these two feelings in a being who was accustomed to
amazing ebullitions, excited him to such a degree that he could find
expression only in tears; and it was many a long day since his weary
eyes had shed tears. The Nut saw that the limbs of this Titan trembled
under him when he stood up to receive him. Then he clasped him in his
arms. And they held each other fast, and their hearts beat in unison at
that moment of mutual grief. . . . A knock at the door told them that
they must say good-bye.

"As you are not coming with me," said the Nut, "I must at least hear
from you. Let me have news of you. I know that you receive letters in
secret. Tell me how I can write to you."

Chéri-Bibi shook his head.

"No, no," he returned. "This ends it all. I insist. . . . We shall no
longer know each other. The Nut is dead."

As a result of those terrible but necessary words a silence fell, short
but deep as the chasms into which men who dread lest they be seized with
giddiness dare not look. Then Chéri-Blbi said:

"Listen to me. I believe you are safe forever. But we can never tell. I
have a friend in France from whom you can ask anything, if you need a
friend--the Dodger. He is a grocer in the Rue Saint-Roch, Paris, and his
real name is Hilaire. He is one of the straightest of men. You can get
your supplies from his place. If you want to be well dealt with you have
but to say to him the one word '_Fatalitas._'"

It was the last utterance, the supreme farewell, of Chéri-Bibi in
taking leave of the Nut. . . . And the Nut allowed himself to be dragged
away by Fernandez.

* * * * *

The small boats which brought the passengers from the estuary of the
Oyapok had put off, and the _Dordogne_, commanded by Captain Lalouette,
began to churn the sea with her propellers. Soon Cape Orange, and by
degrees the entire coastline of Guiana, the land in which the Nut had so
greatly suffered, disappeared from view. But to his honor be it said
that notwithstanding his long martyrdom, he could not remove his eyes
from the land, for he was leaving behind an unhappy man with a splendid
heart without whom he would have long since died in despair.

Suddenly a slight cry beside him made him turn his head. A charming
young girl in a flutter of anxiety placed her hands to her hair. Her
veil, caught by the wind, had become entangled in the rigging and was
held fast.

The Nut helped to release the handsome child, and their hands touched.
The most trivial gesture, the most insignificant incident sometimes
assumes a considerable importance. . . . A few minutes later the Nut
learned the young girl's name. It was Mlle. Françoise de la Boulays,
and she was returning with her father from the Upper Amazon, to which
district he had been sent on an official mission. They were going back
to France saddened beyond measure by the startling events which had
followed one upon the other during the preceding month.

The Nut did not venture to appear in the saloon at dinner time. To begin
again, in this way without some intermediate stage, civilized life,
after having been buried in the grave for more than ten years; to meet
the frank look of that pure-souled girl when he was still shuddering
from the "evil eye" of the warders; to help himself to well cooked food
from a luxurious dish when he was still feeling the nausea of the
service tubs which contained the convicts' skilly! . . . He was afraid.
. . . He was afraid.

And then a few minutes before as he stood in front of a glass, he took
off his hat, and he saw his bare forehead, the bare forehead of a
convict on which he seemed to read in letters of fire "Number 3213."

He remained on deck.

At that moment the wireless operator hurriedly passed him and entered
the dining saloon, and almost immediately afterwards the Captain's voice
was heard:

"Ladies and Gentlemen . . . it's victory . . . victory for France.
Joffre has defeated the Germans on the Marne."

The thunders of applause which followed may be imagined. . . .

When Mlle. de la Boulays mounted the deck again she found the Nut in
tears; and she spoke to him and shook him by the hand. When she left him
he remained behind. Her voice continued to ring in his ears during the
night. He was still on deck after the other persons in the ship, except
the watch, had gone to sleep.

Then the sun appeared and lit up the Nut's radiant face, and leaning on
the bulwarks he beheld the rise of a new dawn on the world.




CHAPTER X

FOUR YEARS LATER


"But my dear Captain, why did you refuse the Legion of Honor? It's
inconceivable."

"Because, my dear girl, I considered that I didn't deserve it. That's
all."

"Now that's too bad."

Mlle. Françoise de la Boulays rose from the settle where she had just
invited Captain Didier d'Haumont, who was gradually recovering health
and strength, to be seated. Certainly there were times when she failed
to understand her dear invalid. Didier d'Haumont had been wounded and
mentioned in the orders of the day several times; he wore with joy and
pride the cross, but firmly refused the Legion of Honor, remarking:

"I will accept it at some future time when I've deserved it."

"Shall I tell you what I think? Well, you're getting proud," said
Françoise in a delightful tone of annoyance.

"Possibly it's something like that," returned the Captain smiling; and
then he became serious and was silent.

His sudden silences in the midst of the most cheerful conversation
constituted one of the riddles which Mlle. de la Boulays was unable to
solve. True, there were moments when the Captain not only baffled her
completely by his silences, but occasionally by expressing opinions
which were incomprehensible and directly at variance with those held by
most level-headed persons. He sometimes uttered a word, and at the same
time gave a peculiar smile, which seemed to indicate that he was not
entirely in agreement on these matters with the rest of the world.

Nevertheless Françoise was convinced that she had never in the course
of her life met a finer intelligence than his, nor a more sympathetic
mind, nor a braver heart.

She was attracted to him from the first; from that evening on the
_Dordogne_ when they celebrated the victory on the Marne, and she was a
witness of his intense emotion. . . . They sat at the same table and
became good friends during the voyage. Captain Lalouette introduced
Didier to M. de la Boulays; and Françoise's father, who was himself an
ardent patriot, was struck by the generous enthusiasm with which a man
like d'Haumont, who was no longer a young man, left important business
affairs to return to France and take his place in the fighting line.
True, such instances were not rare, but what was remarkable in his case
was the almost boyish delight with which he spoke of battles that were
to come, and the mystic joy, as it were, with which he envisaged death.

"I would give all that I possess to die like that," he said.

It was known that d'Haumont was a very rich man.

Françoise concealed her agitation when the steamer reached its
destination and they had to part.

"Good-bye forever," Didier said.

His departure was so abrupt that she had no opportunity of asking him
for an explanation of this enigmatic remark.

M. de la Boulays was the owner of a country house near the boundary of
the zone occupied by the army. He straightway devoted a considerable
part of the house and the buildings cm his estate to the service of the
Red Cross. In this temporary hospital Françoise nursed the wounded with
untiring care and devotion.

For two years she heard nothing of Didier d'Haumont. A day came,
however, when she saw his name in a newspaper. In spite of the great
reticence with which heroic exploits in the war were treated, it was
related that Lieutenant Didier d'Haumont and his company had held
throughout the night against two German regiments a position of supreme
importance, which the reserves were unable to reach until dawn. He was
brought bade, severely wounded, with the seven survivors of the
struggle. The day on which she read to her father the news of this great
feat a general commanding one of the armies, whose name had become
famous after the battle of the Yser, was dining with them. He knew
Didier d'Haumont, for he had been his colonel, and was able to speak of
his rash bravery in the battles for Flanders. Moreover, his attention
had been specially called to him by the War Office where d'Haumont had
friends, among others a Jewish banker attached to the Ministry, by whose
intermediary, if gossip could be believed, Didier d'Haumont had
deposited at the exchequer, as a gift, nearly two million francs worth
of gold dust, his entire fortune.

Mlle. de la Boulays left the room when she heard these last words, not
wishing her father to see how greatly this talk about d'Haumont affected
and even unnerved her. The newspaper which told the story of his exploit
reported also that the lieutenant, after hovering between life and death
for some days, was now out of danger.

Some months drifted by. And one evening during a great offensive a
captain who had been considerably knocked about by a shell was brought
into the operating-room.

Françoise recognized Didier d'Haumont at the moment that he recovered
consciousness. The emotion which overcame both of them was such that
they made no effort to conceal it. He determined to discover the truth
about his condition. He begged Françoise to save him from an operation
which would make a cripple of him. He would rather die; and truth to
tell, he seemed anxious only for one thing: to be left to die.

It was Françoise who saved his life and prevented an amputation which
had already been decided upon. And now he was well again; staying in M.
de la Boulays' own apartments and treated as an old friend of the
family. His strength had, he said, entirely returned, though Mlle. de la
Boulays was inclined to doubt it, and he began to talk of going away.
The armistice, which was now signed, created for him, he said, fresh
duties.

"You are always telling me that you owe your life to me," said
Françoise in a somewhat constrained tone, "and it seems that the only
way you can prove your gratitude is by promptly leaving us." It is at
this point in their friendly disputes that we come upon Didier and
Françoise in the de la Boulays' park.

"Haven't you any relatives?" she asked, after a short pause.

"No. . . . I have no relatives."

She hesitated slightly and then, with a sudden movement of her head, for
she was as red as a rose, she flung out:

"Haven't you ever thought of new ones?"

"Upon my word, no. . . . It's too late." And he added with a laugh, "You
forget my hair is turning grey."

"Oh, ever so little. Besides, what does that prove?"

"It proves that I am over the marrying age."

"What you say is silly. Our friend the Vicomte d'Arly was married when
he was sixty."

"Very well, I'll wait till then."

She began to laugh.

"Tell me, do you ever think of the dramatic coincidence of our meeting
here, although you said 'good-bye' to me forever? It was fate taking its
revenge on you. And quite unmercifully! . . . Why did you want to lose
sight of me forever?"

He looked her straight in the face. He was very pale.

"Because my life does not belong to me," he said. Françoise leaned for
a moment for support on the marble baluster. Obviously she faltered
where she stood. He felt sorry for her and also not a little sorry for
himself.

"Don't you think that it brings you bad luck to say 'good-bye for the
present' in war time, when your life belongs to your country?"

She breathed again. She had imagined that Didier's heart was not free.

She was much easier, but she still raged within herself at the
incredible obstinacy with which he refused to understand that she loved
him and that he had but to say one word.

"I'll leave you," she said nervously. "I have to dress for dinner. I'm
expecting one of my admirers here this evening."




CHAPTER XI

COUNT DE GORBIO


Count Stanislas de Gorbio was a handsome man, and quite young, for he
was still in the thirties.

There are certain women who cannot endure his particular style of
beauty: velvet black eyes, black moustache, black beard, black hair, a
pale, delicate almost feminine complexion, and dazzling white teeth
displayed in an everlasting smile. Such men are too good looking; they
are insipid, these women declare. They prefer, if we may believe them, a
man who is frankly ugly.

In so saying some of them scarcely speak the truth, for they change
their tune if one of those insipid persons pays court to them. It was
thus, for instance, that Mlle. de la Boulays, who had repeatedly
declared, without attaching any importance to it, that the airs and
graces of Count Stanislas de Gorbio only "made her smile," in other
words, that she ridiculed them, began that evening to lend the most
assiduous and smiling attention to the Count's amiable chatter.

She had discarded the Red Cross uniform which, admirably suiting her
clear-cut beauty, seemed to emphasize the real and somewhat serious side
of an expression belonging less to a young girl than to a young woman
already conversant with the sorrows of life. Françoise's childhood had
not been happy. When she was ten years of age she suffered the great
loss of her mother to whom she was tenderly attached. Her father married
again, but the marriage was unhappy for both of them. A divorce,
however, which had been obtained not long before, set both father and
daughter free. And now Françoise and her father lived for each other,
never separating, traveling together and finding consolation for the
cares and sorrows of the past in their perfect affection.

M. de la Boulays had plunged into considerable business affairs, anxious
to increase the fortune of his daughter, who was destined to make a
brilliant marriage. She had already refused several suitors. She argued
that there was no hurry, though she had passed her twenty-fifth
birthday.

Mlle. de la Boulays was fair-haired--so fair-haired that everyone who
came near her was bathed in sunshine. Count Stanislas de Gorbio seemed
as though he were illuminated. Never, indeed, had that handsome head
with its crown of gold bent towards him with so much sweetness to listen
to words which he could not regard as more eloquent that day than on the
day before. Never had those eyes, those great grey-green eyes, with
their variable shadows, like waves affected by the least caprice of the
wind, never had those eyes looked at him with such persistence. In truth
they fixed themselves only on him. That evening the Count had some
grounds for feeling sure that the victory was won.

Didier followed their movements, and his feelings may be imagined.
During dinner he seemed greatly dejected, answering in an abstracted
manner the few questions which were put to him by M. de la Boulays, who
did not fail to notice his guest's gloomy demeanor.

When they retired to the drawing-room Françoise's father asked Didier
if he were not somewhat indisposed, to which he made answer that on the
contrary he was quite well, and if he had shown some depression during
this last meal, it was because he was compelled, as the result of
certain news which he had received from Paris, to leave them that very
night by the late express.

M. de la Boulays bowed and uttered a few polite expressions of regret,
but made no attempt to keep Didier. He felt sure that Didier was very
jealous of Count de Gorbio, for he could not imagine anyone coming near
Françoise without falling in love with her on the spot. Count de Gorbio
was in love with his daughter. She should choose for herself, do as she
pleased. It suited her to smile that evening on the Count; and M. de la
Boulays would be delighted if his daughter decided to marry him, for he
was a considerable personage, reckless, perhaps, in business, but one of
those men with whom, generally speaking, everything succeeds.

When Françoise came up to Didier with a cup of coffee he was on the
point of telling her of his departure, but as she moved quickly away
after serving him, as she served the others, smiling faintly and making
a few trivial remarks, he kept silent.

She returned to de Gorbio in the embrasure of a window, and the chatter
was renewed between them. Then a serious expression flashed over her
countenance, and she became quiet. It was de Gorbio who went on talking,
eyeing her in a peculiar manner. Didier turned away feeling greatly
distressed. What was the Count saying to her which could be of such
interest that she listened to him like that?

De Gorbio's words were ordinary enough but quite explicit.

"I've loved you from the time I first saw you. Will you give me
permission to ask M. de la Boulays for your hand? I think I may assure
you that your father would be pleased to see our union."

Françoise did not appear in any sense surprised.

"If you have spoken to my father of your intentions, how is it that he
hasn't said anything to me?" she returned.

"M. de la Boulays answered me: 'I shall do what my daughter desires. It
is for her to decide and you to persuade her.' Have I succeeded in
persuading you?"

Mlle. de la Boulays listened with great attention to the Count's words,
but apparently she was not greatly perturbed by them. She raised her
eyes not to the speaker but to look round for Didier. She could not see
him. He had left the drawing room.

"Give me time to think it over," she said, and she took leave of him.

Didier, in fact, went to the balustrade. Here he came across an officer
who had sat next to him at dinner, and asked him about Count de Gorbio.
Who was the man who was so far advanced in Mile, de la Boulays'
friendship?

"He is a Count created by the Pope, and during the last three or four
years has launched into every sphere of society. He invested
considerable monies in munition factories; and I hear that he and M. de
la Boulays possess joint interests in various undertakings."

Didier made his way down to the park, walking about in the dimly-lit
solitude like a soul distraught. He pressed his burning forehead to the
iron rails of the garden gate, and stared vaguely at the white line of
the road without seeing anything. He did not observe near him, on the
other side of the gate, a man who was spying on him. He did not see, or
rather he paid no heed, to a peddler's cart which went past. Nor did he
perceive the nod which the peddler exchanged with the man behind the
wall. Didier was conscious only of what was passing within himself; he
thought only of his own condition which seemed to him as miserable as
could be, and yet there was a time, not so very long ago, when he
regarded himself as the most wretched of men.

But that was because he had learned to know hell and had not attained
the paradise lost of Françoise's love. The story of creation portrays
the awful spectacle of Adam and Eve driven from Eden by the angel with
the flaming sword. Didier looked upon their woes as less than his own.
They had been driven from the garden of Eden. Didier had driven himself
out. He had drawn the sword upon himself.

At one time--and the time was not very far distant--the man called the
Nut was the friend of a tremendous person from whom at times the cry
_Fatalitas_ burst forth like the fatal words which appeared in letters
of fire on the wall at Belshazzer's feast.

Didier quivered with emotion at his remembrance of the Nut and with
faltering steps turned to go back to the house, through the darkness of
the park pierced by the uncertain light of the moon.

Before him stood a figure which barred his way. It was the figure of
love. It was Françoise.

"What is this my father tells me?" she asked at once. "You are off to
Paris to-night? Do you wish to leave us, Monsieur d'Haumont?"

Didier repeated what he had already said to M. de la Boulays, whereupon
she reminded him of the unwisdom of going away in his precarious state
of health.

"I am quite well now, thanks to you, and I shall never forget it."

He tried to utter this last sentence in an expressionless fashion, not
wishing to betray the emotion which almost made him cry out.
Nevertheless his voice shook.

A silence fell which she did not at once break. A seat was at hand and
she sat down. At last it seemed as if she had made up her mind.

"Your leaving us so hurriedly makes it difficult for me I assure you,"
she declared in a blank voice in which she too concealed her feelings
which were not devoid of a certain annoyance with the Captain. "You must
know that I need the advice of a good friend, and I thought of speaking
to you, but here you are about to leave us. It's a pity."

"I'm not going for a couple of hours yet," returned Didier frigidly,
"and if I can be of any use to you. Mlle. . . ."

"Well then, I will tell you," said Françoise with a casual air. "Will
you believe that an incident has happened this evening which I was far
from expecting. You must know that Count de Gorbio has amused himself by
making love to me. Everyone took it in fun, and I myself was I don't
know how far from treating him seriously. I called him 'my admirer,'
laughing a little at him and at his manner, which is slightly too
affected for my liking. But what can one do? Tastes differ. Personally
I like men to be men. The Count with his butterfly manners never
attracted me. . . . But perhaps I'm boring you with my silly
tales. . . ."

"I'm not losing a single word, Mlle."

"Well, now, to come to the main point. Count de Gorbio told me this
evening that he was in love with me. He has spoken to my father who, he
says, would be happy to accept him as a son-in-law. In short he asks me
to marry him. I told him that I wanted time for reflection, and in view
of my friendship with you and my reliance on your judgment, I've come
straight away to you for reflection! Tell me frankly, Monsieur
d'Haumont; what do you advise me to do?"

As she spoke she took his hand, for she saw him standing before her as
motionless as a statue and she was dismayed by his silence. She did not
doubt that he loved her, and his attitude pained her as much on his
account as it pained her on her own. She motioned him to a seat beside
her on the settle where during the last two months they had had so many
pleasant discussions. While he remained like one petrified she no longer
concealed her agitation. And was not the gesture, the rather peremptory
gesture of her hand, by which she asked him to sit down beside her, was
it not the most significant of avowals?

Then Didier's voice was heard. Neither of them recognized it. Who and
what was this third person who came between them and was now speaking?

"You know the Count better than I do, Mademoiselle, and in such a
matter, what I think or what I do not think is of no consequence."

Françoise's heart turned to ice, for this was not the voice of a third
person. It was Didier himself, seated beside her, who had spoken those
cruel words.

She was on her feet.

"No consequence indeed!" she exclaimed. "Only my happiness is at stake!
That matters little to you."

"Oh, Mademoiselle," protested the unhappy man, unable to say another
word.

"Well, do you advise me to marry him--yes or no?"

"If he is an honest man--yes."

It was all over between them. In a tone in which there was a suggestion
almost of enmity she said:

"Thank you, Monsieur d'Haumont. You are a real friend! Pray give me your
arm and let's go back to the house."

* * * * *

The man near the garden gate whom Captain d'Haumont had failed to notice
resumed his journey, keeping near the wall. He was pushing his bicycle
before him. Without haste he overtook the peddler's cart which was
continuing its way at the walking pace of the old horse harnessed to it.
A hundred yards farther on they came to a small door in the wall. The
man signalled the peddler to stop, exchanged a few words with him in
German, mounted his bicycle, and went off quickly into the country.

The peddler backed his cart against the park wall, and started to
unharness the horse as if he had made up his mind to camp at that spot
for the night.

Just then the door leading into the park was opened and a man servant
appeared, hatless, his hands in his pockets. He seemed to have come out
for a stroll and to "take the air." Nevertheless, between the two men,
the one who was unharnessing the horse and the other who was "taking the
air," a few quick words passed.

"All well?"

"Yes, all goes well. The Count has arrived."

The man servant pointed to the key which was in the lock. The peddler
looked at his watch, nodded his head, and the man servant went back into
the park.

Five minutes later the peddler was hiding in a summer-house adjoining
the wall, the roof of which jutted over the road near the little door.
At the slightest alarm, whether from inside or outside the garden, the
peddler could take refuge either in the road or in the park. The place
was well chosen for a private conversation, for it was impossible to be
overheard, not to mention that it was quite natural for M. de la
Boulay's guests to come there for the cool of the evening or to dream.
The peddler was not kept waiting long for his "dreamer." Almost at once
Count Stanislas de Gorbio appeared.

"Well?" he questioned.

"I have an urgent message from Nina Noha," the man returned, holding out
a letter.

The Count seized it, seemingly very eager to learn the contents, for
diving into the summer-house, and screened by the man, he did not
hesitate to bring into play a small, dark, pocket lantern. The letter
was soon read. The Count appeared to be satisfied and put several
questions to the peddler concerning the visits which had been made and
the guests who had been received at the house during the last few days.
As they were about to part company the Count asked:

"Have you any special information regarding this Captain d'Haumont who
is so much talked about? Did anyone know him before the war?"

"I have been asking about him and I'm waiting for the reply. Be on your
guard. He's been trotting round with the governor's daughter ever since
he's been here, and your 'traveling agent' just told me that he's with
her now."

The Count clenched his fists, sent the man away, and flung himself out
of the summer house. He was nearing the Château when he caught sight,
in profile before him, of the figures of Captain d'Haumont and Mlle. de
la Boulays. The girl was leaning on the officer's arm. He quickened his
steps without making the least sound, anxious to overhear a conversation
which he inferred might be confidential and of particular interest to
himself, but he could not catch a word, for, truth to tell, the two
friends were saying nothing.

The silence in no way pacified the Count. He was sufficiently man of the
world and experienced in love affairs to be aware that there are
silences sometimes between a man and woman, which are more eloquent than
the tenderest speech. It is when they understand each other best that
they have least to say, and the sweetest moments are those which pass in
the mute exchange of the one idea which they hold in common, and the
delightful feeling of perfect harmony.

The Count was furious. He had not thought that the danger was so
real. . . . Up to that day he had not given a thought to it at all. He
attached but slight importance to certain secret tales which had come
to him from the Château servants.

Count de Gorbio had an opinion of his own personal merits which rendered
it difficult for him to comprehend that he might receive a rebuff where
women were concerned. And he was convinced that in spite of Mlle. de la
Boulays' laughing and chaffing air, she had been greatly affected by the
delicate tact of his attentions to her. And now he discovered that he
had a serious rival. De Gorbio knew, moreover, that his friends greatly
relied on his marriage with Mlle. de la Boulays. The obstacle which
stood in his way inclined him, therefore, to take some unpleasant action
against the Captain when he met him face to face in the hall.

Moreover the two men took stock of each other with a look of hostility
which the excessively cheerful air of the one and the excessively frigid
air of the other failed to conceal; but a voice behind them said:

"Count, I've been speaking of our plans to the Captain, who is my
sincere friend. He has given me advice which tells me that he will soon
be your friend. To-night you may ask my father for my hand."

As he heard those words which overwhelmed him and for which he was so
little prepared, his delight and gratitude straightway manifested
themselves in sundry praises of the gallant Captain d'Haumont and he
went up to him with outstretched hand; but doubtless by an unlucky
chance, at that very moment d'Haumont stooped to pick up some object, so
that when he stood erect again he had forgotten de Gorbio, who was still
holding out his hand, though no one thought of taking it, not even Mlle.
de la Boulays, who had disappeared through another door.




CHAPTER XII

AN URGENT MESSAGE


Captain d'Haumont went up to his room. His mind was in so great a state
of turmoil that he paid no heed to the servants who jostled him slightly
as they descended quickly the front door steps at which a motor-car had
stopped.

As he was closing his window he heard M. de la Boulays' voice greeting a
new arrival.

"How are you, my dear fellow?"

But even this did not hold his attention although the name that was
mentioned was that of one of the most celebrated political personages of
the war.

There was nothing, moreover, exceptional in the visit. M. de la Boulays'
country house stood near the crossways of the most important main roads
leading to the rear of the army, and persons of the highest distinction
often came to him and requested his hospitality.

Most of them were friends of the family, or at all events acquaintances.
M. de la Boulays had been in the diplomatic service for some time, and
he knew personally pretty well all the great figures in the Republic.

Captain d'Haumont neither heard nor saw, nor did he trouble himself
about anything but closing his window and packing his trunks.

As he was collecting together on the table the remaining articles which
belonged to him, he picked up a photograph of Mlle. de la Boulays in her
Red. Cross uniform, on which was written: "To Captain Didier d'Haumont,
with admiration for his bravery, from Françoise de la Boulays."

He gazed at it for a few moments with a look upon his face which would
have told the truth to the least sophisticated if by chance such a
person had been present. But the Captain had closed the door, for he
liked to be certain of being alone when his secret feelings threatened,
by their tyrannical craving for some outward expression, to betray him.

How many persons take their revenge in the privacy of their own room for
the restraints which they force upon themselves when they are among
their fellows! And the sight which the inquisitive might behold if they
entered the room in which offended pride, despised love, or any other
human passion was hiding itself from society, after affecting in
drawing-rooms the mask of indifference--such a sight would not be devoid
of the unexpected.

Offended pride would be seen tearing its hair and despised love cursing
a thousand curses. Captain d'Haumont would have been seen putting his
lips to the photograph of the beloved image, discarding it almost
immediately, and finally burning it in the flame of a candle.

He watched to the end with a feeling of pain the candle in which the
beloved portrait was consumed. It seemed actually to suffer the torture
which he inflicted on it, and in the gleam of the dying flame, in the
last ashes, the face of Mlle. de la Boulays seemed set with a look at
her inquisitor of unforgettable distress and reproach.

Strange to say--and it bore witness once more to the connection which
subsists between matter and spirit even when kept asunder by thick
walls, a connection to which the middle ages saw no limits, for they
practised "casting a spell" on their enemies--while Mlle. de la Boulays
suffered thus in her portrait she was suffering equally in her mind. And
it was at the very moment when, in her drawing-room, she was
acknowledging the congratulations of her friends on the news which it
suited Count de Gorbio to spread abroad, that she sank in a huddled heap
in a chair as if suddenly deprived of life. . . .

Captain d'Haumont was in his room strapping his luggage when a knock
came at the door. It was M. de la Boulays' valet, a man called Schwab,
who claimed to be of Alsatian descent and whom he had never liked though
he could not say why, for he never had any occasion to complain of him.
But when, as in the case of Didier d'Haumont, a man has a past full of
irregularities, and has been forced to keep company with all sorts of
people, his perceptions become particularly acute to detect the moral
weight of the more or less mysterious elements which surround him, so
that Captain d'Haumont was assailed by a vague foreboding with regard to
Schwab.

The man came up to tell him that M. de la Boulays would be glad to see
him in his study before his departure.

D'Haumont went with the servant, who showed him into a room which was
occupied by M. de la Boulays and the important person who had just
arrived. This gentleman had been appointed to conduct a secret
investigation into some startling incidents in enemy propaganda.

Captain d'Haumont was introduced to Monsieur G---- by M. de la Boulays.

"Monsieur G------- wants a reliable man for a special mission," he said.
"He came here from Paris in his car with a small staff, none of whom he
can spare. It's a matter of taking a letter to Paris to-night, and you
will be put on your honor for its safety. Monsieur G---- is anxious that
the commission should be carried out with great tact. Since you are
taking the train to Paris this evening I consider that Monsieur G----
cannot have a better 'messenger' than you."

"I am obliged to you, M. de la Boulays, for giving me the opportunity of
making myself useful," returned the Captain. "Where am I to deliver the
letter?"

"To the Hotel d'Or . . . at the corner of the Rue Saint Honoré and the
Rue Saint Roch."

"I shall reach Paris at two o'clock in the morning. Must I have the
person for whom it is intended disturbed then?"

"Yes, at once. You will send him this." And Monsieur G---- scribbled a
few words on his card, which he handed to d'Haumont.

"I suggested to Monsieur G---- that you should go to Paris by car, but
he prefers you to take the train as you had arranged," said M. de la
Boulays. "In point of fact, your journey to Paris must have no
connection with Monsieur G----'s stay at my house."

"I understand, gentlemen. I will now take leave of you as I've only just
about enough time to get to the station."

"Here's the letter," said Monsieur G----, holding out an envelope of
medium size which bore neither name or address. But he uttered a name
and said:

"Give it into his own hands."

Didier slipped the letter into the inside pocket of his jacket, which he
buttoned closely over his chest.

He bowed to Monsieur G----, who shook him warmly by the hand, thanking
him in words which would have made any other man proud. But the Nut's
pride now lay only in his powers of endurance.

He set out without seeing Mlle. de la Boulays again. The station was
some distance from the Château, and he was driven to it in a car
attached to the Medical Service. The train was late and he had to wait
an hour. He stepped into an empty compartment, but at the last moment a
man opened the door and took a seat facing him. He was too obsessed by
his thoughts to pay the least attention to the intruder.

The Nut was satisfied with himself. The fierce heart of the convict
could beat with pride under the tunic of the soldier. Marvelous to say,
not until that hour when he had made up his mind to flee from the path
of happiness, had he dared to allow his thoughts to recur to the penal
settlement. It was the first time that his mind could clearly and
honestly and calmly revert to his past life.

Up to that day he had turned away with horror from the accursed past and
sought forgetfulness mainly in the excitement of his reckless bravery.

Suddenly, with the awakening of love, had come the strongest temptation
that could check a man in the path of regeneration. He could win this
beautiful girl and lead her to the altar, and all the world would
commend that union of beauty and courage. It was a splendid dream, was
that marriage, and for a moment he was dazzled by it. He closed his
eyes. When he opened them again he beheld under the halo which crowned
the woman he loved, strange letters and figures forming a word and a
number: "Cayenne, 3213."

And now he had said his last word. Yes, he had had the courage to go
away. He had had the further courage, compared with which the first was
easy, the supreme courage, to say to himself: "No woman can marry me."

It was a fine gesture. He might suffer beyond measure, but he could look
the convict settlement in the face without a blush. And that, at all
events, was something. . . .

It was something to be able to say to himself: "I come from prison, from
that vile, ignominious place. I have been an outcast from the world, an
accursed being without a name, save the name that lies in the mouths of
miscreants, and they called me 'lag,' 'lifer,' 'old offender.' . . .
They called me the Nut, and now I am called Didier d'Haumont, but
I . . . I call myself an honest man."

Such were the thoughts which were passing through his mind when the
train arrived in Paris.

He alighted from the carriage, carrying his bag, and hurried through the
yard leading into the street, towards the only taxi which stood on the
rank near the iron gates.

At this juncture he was joined by the traveler who had entered his
compartment and who, in the course of the journey, had vainly endeavored
to engage him in conversation.

"Captain, my car has been sent to the station for me. Will you allow me
to drive you home?"

Didier was on the point of accepting the offer, which seemed to come at
the right moment, but suddenly, without any other reason than that of
caution, which, in his case, kept him continually on the alert, he
declined. He did not know this man who wished to make himself so
agreeable. Didier's motto was to be suspicious of everybody and
everything.

After thanking him, he turned again to the taxi, but he was too late,
for it was already engaged and starting off. Fortunately two cabs stood
on the rank.

"Drive to the corner of the Rue Saint Roch and the Rue d'Argenteuil," he
said, not wishing to give the exact address to which he was proceeding.

The cab turned down the Boulevard de Strasbourg at a smart pace, went
along the principal boulevards, and after passing through the Avenue de
l'Opéra plunged into the smaller streets. In another five minutes the
Nut would be in sight of his goal.

Suddenly there was a terrible shock and Didier and the cab were
overturned. He might have been killed on the spot, but he picked himself
up without a scratch and could see at a glance what had happened. A
motor-car had collided so violently with the cab that the latter was
shattered to pieces, the horse was ripped open and lay dying, and the
driver, who was thrown into the gutter, gave no sign of life.

Half a dozen dark forms sprang from the car and surrounded the wrecked
cab. They closed upon Didier with a common impulse which left no doubt
as to their intentions. But he made a rush on one side, hurling one of
the dark figures to the ground, and darted off down a neighboring
passage. The man started to run after him.

Not the least dramatic part of the incident was the silence in which the
pursuit was effected. Didier at one moment thought that he had put the
villains off the scent, but he did not know exactly where he was. A
whistle rang out behind him and other dark forms appeared under a street
lamp, blocking his passage from the street.

He retraced his steps, but at this end, too, he caught sight of
suspicious figures. This time he could not escape and there would be a
fight for it. He was in no sense alarmed, though his "mission" and his
life were both in danger.

As he was casting about for a corner in which to await the assault of
his adversaries, his eyes encountered a sign and he read by the light of
the street lamp: "Rue Saint Roch;" and a little farther away, painted in
large letters on the iron shutters which closed the shop: "_Hilaire's
Up-to-date Grocery Stores. The Old and the New World United._" A dock at
that moment chimed three.




CHAPTER XIII

HILAIRE


It might be well to hark back a few hours and discover what was taking
place in the shop which was to have its brief moment of fame.

M. Hilaire was a tradesman of good reputation in the quarter. His
leanness and the singular expression of his countenance, which seemed to
be laughing and crying at the same time, made of him a well-known
figure. He was a boon companion to those whom he favored with his
friendship, and a persistent card player; for he had a taste for the
tap-room as well as a love of practical joking, notwithstanding that, to
please his wife, he assumed the airs of a respectable tradesman.

His wife was the dark spot in Hilaire's otherwise fortunate existence,
for Virginie was of a jealous temperament and endowed by nature with an
execrable temper. Had he been free from Virginie and the competition of
a provision merchant at the next corner, Hilaire would have been a
perfectly happy man. It was said in the district that he had risen from
nothing, but that was all to his credit. His enemies--the provision
merchant and his wife, their customers and their circle--declared that
M. Hilaire had spent a more than riotous youth and must be an
ex-anarchist, for his language when he was in his cups showed little
respect for the established order of society.

On that particular night M. Hilaire was in his shop making up his books.
The reason why he was not in bed was that he was waiting up for his
wife, with whom he had had a stormy altercation in connection with the
girl who formed his sole staff, for the two young men who were learning
how to sell golden syrup and prunes had left for the war, in which, in
fact, they conducted themselves like heroes, and when they returned on
leave from time to time each wore stripes on his arm and medals on his
breast.

The girl in question was seventeen years of age, had dazzling teeth and
a turned-up nose. She was as dark as a mole or a gypsy. Perhaps she was
a gypsy. She spoke Italian. She was probably a child picked up in the
streets. Hilaire did not go into these details when he engaged her. The
girl bore a name which her character belied. She was called Sarah.
Madame Hilaire called her Zoé.

Now this young creature, who worked under her mistress with the will of
four men and was always of an exasperating good humor, had one serious
failing: she possessed a pair of magnificent black eyes which seemed to
laugh at the whole world. M. Hilaire found some diversion in those two
eyes, and could not look at them without a smile. It was not the same
thing with Madame Hilaire. She caught her husband on more than one
occasion in the act of ogling the girl. She did not like it, and the
scenes which ensued were sufficient proof of it.

That very evening she surprised them throwing prunes at each other. The
thing caused a pretty disturbance. Zoé and Hilaire both received a box
on the ear, and afterwards Madame Hilaire went upstairs to dress, vowing
that she was fed up with a man who had no respect for his goods and did
not know how to keep his place with his servant.

After locking Sarah-Zoé in her attic and putting the key in her pocket,
she told her husband that she was going to stay with her mother until
something better turned up. The threat, which was obviously directed at
M. Hilaire's honor and was renewed at least once a week, was not
calculated to stagger him. He knew that it was in Virginie's temperament
to betray him, and that she had another fault: her love of cards. "Go
and have a game of poker," he said to himself, "and make it last as long
as possible."

She would come back cleaned out--that was the rule.

Meantime, in order to furnish himself with weapons that would give him
the advantage, M. Hilaire was examining the books in detail. They were
kept by his better half, who falsified them now and again in order to
conceal slight borrowings from the cash, which she made without saying a
word to her skinflint of a husband.

Thus the hours went by. M. Hilaire discovered that his wife had
appropriated forty-two francs fifty centimes, and was waiting for her
with an impatience which may well be imagined, when two tremendous blows
from a fist sounded on the iron shutters and a voice growled
"_Fatalitas!_"

It was two o'clock in the morning. At that same hour Didier was in the
train to Paris thinking of the penal settlement for the first time
without undue shame. As he heard that significant word Hilaire sprang
from his office like a Jack-in-the-box shot up by a powerful spring, and
tottered in the shop as if he had received one of those blows that make
a man turn dizzy.

Hilaire felt certain that he recognized the voice which flung out the
astounding word. Was such a thing possible?

It was so possible, indeed, that the word was repeated and fresh blows
shook the shop front. And the voice, the curious voice which unhinged
the mind of M. Hilaire, shouted:

"Open the door; I know you're alone!"

Trembling like a child who is frightened or overjoyed, Hilaire leant
towards the small, low door in the shop front, unlocked and opened it. A
huge form at once glided into the shop. The door was closed with a kick,
and the figure displayed itself in its full proportions.

It was a man, or rather a human animal, tall of stature, square of
build, thick-set, with tremendous limbs, and fists capable of felling an
ox, and an extraordinary, fierce-looking head in which only the gleam in
the eyes was visible.

"Chéri-Bibi!" gasped Hilaire, placing his hand on his heart like
sensitive persons who are undergoing a moment of intense excitement.

"If any one asks you if I am Chéri-Bibi say you know nothing about me,"
growled Chéri-Bibi. "You took a long time to open the door. Have you
forgotten me, Dodger?"

At these words Hilaire, who was deathly pale, stretched out his arms and
fell upon the immense chest of the man whom he loved more than any being
in the world.

Chéri-Bibi gave signs of a certain degree of satisfaction.

"You show me at this moment," he said in his gruff voice, which quivered
with an agitation that he strove to control, "you show me that there are
still honest men in the world. Prosperity has not shriveled up your
heart, my dear Dodger."

"I am the happiest man alive now that I see you again, Monsieur le
Marquis."

"Hush!" growled Chéri-Bibi. "Never let that name pass your lips again.
Forget the past, Dodger, as I try to forget it myself. Erase from your
memory those adventures which had their day and from which present
events separate us for ever. At this terrible hour other duties arise. I
have come back to France to defend an innocent man, old chap!"

"Ah, there I recognize Monsieur le Marquis."

"Will you stop worrying me with your 'Monsieur le Marquis'? I would have
you know that I call myself the Bleeder now."

"Good, Monsieur le----"

"Bleeder! They gave me that name at La Villette, where I work in the
slaughter-houses. I am the man whose business it is to cut the throats
of cattle. So they call me the Bleeder. There's an end of it. It's a
name which suits me and I've stuck to it."

"Have you been there long, Monsieur le Bleeder?"

"Please call me Bleeder simply."

"I can't, I can't; I have too much respect for you, Monsieur le
Marquis."

"Oh, you ass! You were always silly like that. Shake hands, my dear old
Dodger. Do you know that you've grown a bit stout!"

"That's not Virginie's fault, for she's continually making scenes."

Chéri-Bibi chuckled.

"And you let her make scenes! Oh, my dear Dodger, that is all that was
wanted. It's clear that you've become a respectable citizen."

They looked into each other's eyes for a moment in silence. They were
seated facing one another, and they held each other's hand, and their
eyes spoke for their hearts in which bloomed the red flower of their
friendship. Thenceforward complete trust returned to them as in the
brave days of their youth, when they were engaged in so many struggles
against an adverse fate, and their minds sped back to the time of their
pleasantest memories. But Chéri-Bibi's life was so ordered that his
pleasantest memories were always enveloped with the tragedy of death.
And those who might have heard the two men thus conjure up with emotion
their delightful past would undoubtedly have fled from them in terror.

"I asked you if you had been long in France, Monsieur le Bleeder."

"The date is no business of yours," Chéri-Bibi returned. "I've been
busy altering my status. I've managed it. Now I am quite easy in my mind
at La Villette, not to mention that I have a coal-dealer's shop in view.
As soon as I had an hour to spare I came to see you. I knew that you
were alone because I had your wife's movements watched. I didn't want
you to have any worries in your household on my account. Do you follow
me, Dodger?"

"You have always been very considerate, Monsieur le Bleeder."

"When Madame Hilaire comes back I shall be warned by a signal from a
fellow on the look-out."

"I see that Monsieur le Bleeder's police can still be relied on."

"So you'll hide me somewhere and I'll slip off when you've gone to bed.
And now, Dodger, let's talk of serious things."

Chéri-Bibi's face became so solemn that Hilaire felt that they were
about to discuss certain things that he had been forbidden to mention,
and of which he had the discretion not to breathe a word.

"Have you had any news during the last five years?" began Chéri-Bibi.

Hilaire broke in at once:

"None during the five years that Madame la Marchioness----"

Chéri-Bibi sprang from his chair with a fierce gesture.

"Who told you to speak of her?" he demanded, choking for breath.

He succeeded in at once mastering his intense excitement. He fell back
into his seat, and passing his hand over his forehead, said in quiet,
gloomy tones with an air of the deepest dejection:

"My dear old Dodger, you must never speak of her or her child. Our lips
are not pure enough for us to dare utter her name; and as to her child,
I fear lest we should bring bad luck upon him. I am dead, actually dead.
You must never forget that. Chéri-Bibi may be alive, but Monsieur le
Marquis is dead. And Chéri-Bibi himself is dead to them so long as they
have no need of him. I know that at the present moment they are abroad
and happy. Her son is growing up by her side, and she is making of him
one of the finest and best of the sons of men. If she wants me later on,
we shall see what we shall see. Meantime, let us sever all connection
with the past. Is that agreed. Dodger?"

"I blush, my dear Monsieur le Bleeder, for having thoughtlessly stirred
up so many painful memories."

"That'll do."

They did not speak again of that mysterious past which we must respect,
as they themselves respected it, till the day when fate in the course of
their extraordinary careers may decree its return. Chéri-Bibi after a
last sigh, went on:

"I merely wanted to ask you if anyone has been here and spoken to you of
me."

"No, not during the last five years."

Chéri-Bibi remained brooding for a while.

"It's just as well. He's forgotten me," he said.

And as Chéri-Bibi's thoughts seemed to have reverted to the other end
of the world, Hilaire, in order to give him the opportunity of coming
back to him, uttered this pithy maxim:

"Ingratitude is met with everywhere and always."

"I don't expect gratitude from anybody, and I owe no gratitude to
anybody," growled Chéri-Bibi. "In this world it's each for himself and
God against us all."

Hilaire did not wince at these terrible words of blasphemy. He had so
often heard his friend "go for" heaven and earth in the most withering
language that he had made up his mind never to allow himself to become
excited over it. Moreover, during the last few moments something
attracted his attention apart from Chéri-Bibi's outburst.

He heard hurried footsteps in the street and some one came to a stand
outside his shop. That some one brushed against the shop-front. The
footsteps were clearly not those of a woman, and thus the person in
question could not be Madame Hilaire.

He was about to get up and see for himself what was coming, when a blow
from a fist was struck on the shutters and the ominous word was once
more flung into echoes of the street: "_Fatalitas!_"

Chéri-Bibi sprang forward.

"It's he," he cried. "I've come in the nick of time. Is Providence this
time on my side?"

He turned to Hilaire, who gazed at him in bewilderment, quite at a loss
as to what was happening either in the house or in the street.

"Open the door and pay every attention to the man who comes in, but
don't mention that I am here."

Having said which Chéri-Bibi retreated to the dining-room.

Hilaire opened the small low door for the second time, but not before
taking from a drawer a revolver which he kept for use in case of
emergency. The Nut darted into the shop. Hilaire closed the door and as
a measure of greater precaution closed also the iron shutter.

He glanced at his strange visitor and at once felt much easier as he saw
before him the face of a scared but entirely honest man.

The new-comer breathed heavily, passing a feverish hand across his brow,
bathed in perspiration.

"Won't you sit down, Monsieur?" said Hilaire, in a tone of extreme
politeness.

The Nut took the proffered chair. He grew more self-possessed. A smile
flickered across Hilaire's face.

"You are quite out of breath. What happened to you, Monsieur?"

"Some ruffians were after me," returned the Nut. "They can't be far
away. If I had not caught sight of the light under your door, and if you
had net been sitting up so late, I don't know what would have become of
me."

He ceased speaking. Furtive steps creeping along the pavement, and even
the exchange of a few words in hushed whispers could be heard some five
paces away from them. And then a great silence fell, but they were not
deceived by it, and Hilaire said in an undertone:

"They're still there."

"Yes, they must have seen me come in. If that's so, they won't go away
in a hurry."

"What do they want with you?"

"I can't tell you that."

"I've been too inquisitive. I apologize. I don't wish to know anything.
I am entirely at your disposal, and ready to help you to the best of my
ability. You said a word when you banged at my door which makes me your
slave."

The Nut turned red.

"Yes, _fatalitas_," he said in a breath.

He paused. They pricked up their ears to the night, which still
maintained its silence. After a while, not without embarrassment, the
Captain went on:

"It's a password which was given to me by a friend of mine who is also,
it seems, your friend."

"Yes, Monsieur," acquiesced Hilaire, with a bow, "a great friend; the
best, the truest of friends, and also the most unfortunate."

"I owe everything to him," said the Captain simply. "He has saved my
life again to-night."

Hilaire bowed again. Neither of them had mentioned the name of
Chéri-Bibi, but they were both thinking of him.

"I will tell you what, in the name of this friend, I ask you to do,"
went on the Nut. "You will be able to say whether it's possible."

"What is it?"

"First I must apologize for not giving you my name, and I shall be
thankful if you will not attempt to discover it."

"When you leave this place I shall forget that you ever came here."

The Nut gave Hilaire his hand.

"My friend was right in telling me that I could count on you. What you
have just said is most considerate, and I shall never forget it."

"He taught me to be considerate," sighed Hilaire. "What can I do for
you?"

"I must get away from here at the earliest moment without being seen."

"They're waiting for you outside," objected Hilaire, indicating by a
movement of his head the street, in which some amount of stir could
still be heard.

"Yes," returned the Captain, "I should like to dodge this street when I
get away. Would that be possible?"

"Possible, but perhaps unwise. Will you stay here for a moment?"

So saying Hilaire left the shop and entered the dining-room, from which
he returned almost at once.

"My proposal is that we should take a stroll on the roofs."

"Where will they lead me?"

"Past the Rue Saint Roch and near the Hotel d'Or . . ."

The officer was already on his feet.

"I'll go with you, Monsieur."

Hilaire opened a door which gave access to a back staircase, and they
soon reached the passage leading to the servants' bedrooms. Hilaire was
carrying a lighted candle. He blew it out.

"We'd better not show a light in the attic we're going into," he
explained, "because it looks out on to the street."

"Is it empty?" asked the Captain.

"No, Monsieur. My wife, who is away this evening, locked our shop-girl
in it before she went out."

Hilaire knocked at the door.

"Who's there?" cried Zoé.

"It's me. Don't trouble. And be sure not to light the candle."

Mademoiselle Zoé as she lay in her bed turned her face to the wall and
thought to herself: "What a madman the governor is! He's going to make
another trip over the rain pipes. One fine day Madame will find him out,
and it's poor Zoé who will suffer."

Suddenly she propped herself up on her elbow.

"But you know very well that you can't come in. Madame has the key."

"I tell you to turn your face to the wall," whispered the voice on the
landing.

And Zoé at once heard Hilaire "rummaging" with the lock. It was not
long in the doing. Zoé herself was quite astonished. She had no idea
that Hilaire possessed such a nice talent in locks.

The door opened and two men entered the room. Turn her face to the wall
as she might, Mademoiselle Zoé none the less found means of satisfying
her curiosity, thanks to a pale moonbeam which pierced the curtain.

Her master was by this time standing at the window, which he opened with
the greatest caution and without the slightest sound. He beckoned to the
man who was with him, and himself led the way on to the roof where the
man followed him.

"There," thought Zoé, "he's got a friend with him to-night. What's the
meaning of it? Who is the man? Where does he come from? Where's he going
to?"

Young Sarah-Zoé had too great a relish for intrigue not to be
interested in the highest degree in the man. She had by now slipped her
little feet out of the bed-clothes when the door was once again opened
and a huge dark form appeared. She gave a cry of fright. But the dark
form had already thrust her back on to the bed.

"Stay where you are, if you value your skin, gypsy. You needn't be
afraid of a Romany."

"Hullo, he's one of us. Seems to know me," she thought, shivering from
head to foot.

She tried to feel reassured, but she was ill at ease. She was very glad
to see him climb on to the roof like the others.

"Good gracious," she thought, "there are plenty of people on the balcony
to-night. What a carnival on the tiles!"

She covered herself with the bed-clothes. Her little face did not pop
out again till half an hour later, when Hilaire came back, and after
closing the window threatened her with dire penalties if she did not
forget what she had seen that night.

Then he quickly went downstairs, for he heard the voice of Madame
Hilaire, who had already come back from her mother.

Next morning as Zoé was helping her master to lay out the goods for
sale in the shop window, she saw an officer stop and approach Hilaire,
and as she had sharp ears she caught the words:

"You acted last night like a man of courage and you saved my life. We
shall meet again, Monsieur."

"Whenever you like," returned Hilaire. "My shop is always open except
after midday on Sundays. Every evening from five to seven I have a
little game of cards in the café round the corner. There's a private
room for a chat. I shall always be glad to be of service to you." And as
a new customer came up to him he added:

"And the next thing, please?"

The officer apparently did not require anything else, for he left the
quarter, without delay, stepped into a taxi, and was driven to the
railway station.




CHAPTER XIV

THE JUDGMENT OF GOD


Some hours later Captain d'Haumont was back again in the de la Boulays'
country house.

He had left it with the firm determination never to return to it
whatever it might cost him. And now he was strolling once more through
the avenues of the park with a secret satisfaction which he made no
attempt to conceal. He must have been impelled by a powerful motive,
doubtless, to set at naught so quickly a line of conduct which he had
ruthlessly marked out for himself, but it was a motive which, in all
sincerity, he had no cause to regret.

It would have needed very little persuasion to induce Captain d'Haumont
to confess that he blessed the startling occurrences the outcome of
which was that he beheld once more the faces and places which filled so
large a part in his heart.

An imperative duty impelled him to cross that garden gate. He had
nothing to reproach himself with. Treason lay concealed in that house;
and he had to unmask it.

Since he had all but fallen a prey to the mysterious gang who had
pursued him so far as the neighborhood of the Hotel d'Or, the Captain
was convinced that the scheme which his villainous aggressors were
carrying out was planned at M. de la Boulays' house. It was the only
place where the hidden enemy might have overheard something to indicate
the importance of the secret mission with which he had been charged. In
a word, Captain d'Haumont believed that the Château de la Boulays was
the center of a spy system. He called to mind that, as he left M. de la
Boulays' study the night before, he almost stumbled over Schwab, whose
attitude had always seemed suspicious. Some few minutes later, at the
moment of leaving the house, he caught a glimpse of two dark forms in
conversation in the park, one of whom was undoubtedly Schwab and the
other curiously suggestive of de Gorbio. The incident had made no great
impression on him at the time, but how prominently it stood out in his
thoughts to-day!

He reached the house after lunch. The men were at the other side of the
park practicing firing with Count de Gorbio. From the sounds of the
shots and the exclamations which followed he gathered that he was quite
close to the butts. He heard the voice of Françoise:

"Well done, Count. That was a wonderful shot. What a pity the Boches are
not up against your pistol!"

Françoise was moving away from the group where the Count was "showing
off" his prowess when her eyes fell upon Didier. She gave a start and
grew pale. Nevertheless she continued her way towards the house as
though she had not seen him.

M. de la Boulays was not less astonished than his daughter at the sudden
and entirely unexpected apparition of the Captain, and though the latter
did not express any desire to see him alone, he realized that he must
have some urgent communication to make to him connected with the
important mission with which the Captain had been entrusted the night
before. In the meantime he took his cue from the Captain's attitude and
was content to wait.

Count de Gorbio treated the new-comer with icy politeness, for he was by
no means pleased to see him again.

Several more shots were fired which served to display the Count's
wonderful skill. He was congratulated by all and they returned to the
house. Didier had declined to take part in the contest when the pistols
were offered to him, under the pretence of a weakness in his right arm.
He had no wish to run the risk of being humiliated before de Gorbio, and
when he looked at him it was certainly not at a cardboard target that he
longed to fire!

As soon as they were in the house M. de la Boulays went up to Didier and
said quietly:

"I presume you have something to tell me. Captain."

"Yes; something serious."

"Would you care to go upstairs to my study?"

"No; don't let any one think we're having a serious talk. We're being
spied upon."

They went on the terrace while one party was arranging a game of poker
with the Count, and another party was making up a game of bridge in
which M. de la Boulays was to join.

"Let me know when you want me," he said. And, turning to Didier, asked
in a somewhat nonplussed tone: "Well, what's it all about?"

"Monsieur de la Boulays, there's a spy in this house."

As he heard those words M. de la Boulays could not restrain himself.

"De Gorbio was right!" he exclaimed.

The result was that before Captain d'Haumont could say another word de
Gorbio, who had caught M. de la Boulays' cry, came up and asked for an
explanation. But d'Haumont became frigidly silent, and M. de la Boulays
appeared to be extremely perplexed by the Captain's attitude. The Count
at once apologized for interposing so clumsily in a private
conversation.

"I thought I heard you say 'de Gorbio was right.' I see that I made a
mistake," and he walked away in spite of M. de la Boulays'
protestations.

"I think you might have explained matters before the Count," said M. de
la Boulays. "This morning he persuaded me to dismiss the man-servant
whom you never liked and whom he caught he tells me, eavesdropping."

"Isn't Schwab here now?" cried d'Haumont. "Well, I'm very sorry to hear
it. We might have brought him to book or caught him in the act. . . .
Now it's too late."

"In any case we can't blame Count de Gorbio."

"I'm not blaming him. I'm only sorry that, owing to the haste with which
he has had him turned out, Schwab can continue his treachery elsewhere."

"I think you are a little unfair to Count de Gorbio," said M. de la
Boulays. "But never mind that, tell me what happened to you to put you
in such a state."

Didier told his story in a few words without entering into particulars
of the attack on him, and passing over in silence, of course, the
incident at Hilaire's grocery stores, the escape by the roofs, and the
descent into a timber merchant's yard, while his adversaries were
waiting for him in the Rue Saint Roch. After all, was not the fact that
he had brought his errand to a successful issue the main thing? Finally,
he told M. de la Bourlays how he had found himself face to face with
Schwab the night before, when he left the study, but he did not feel
called upon to mention that afterwards he caught a glimpse of the Count,
in the park, in conversation with the man.

After M. de la Boulays had heard Didier's story he regretted less than
ever having got rid of Schwab--a point of view which was not shared by
d'Haumont.

Just then some one came up to fetch M. de la Boulays for his bridge
party. He left the Captain after making him promise that he would stay
to dinner. The latter could not well refuse the invitation, for he had
no conceivable pretext for leaving the house before the hour at which
the train departed by which he would return to Paris.

He did not see Mademoiselle de la Boulays again during the whole of the
afternoon, but half an hour before dinner, while he was on the terrace
lost in sorrowful musings, swinging on a rocking-chair and smoking a
cigar, he saw her coming towards him. He threw away his cigar and
stopped the movement of his chair.

He saw from the wistful and lovelorn look in her eyes that she was
suffering no less than he, and he hated himself for his powerlessness to
combat their twofold misery save to disappear from sight.

She came to him in all the simplicity of her soul, such as he had known
her when he recovered consciousness after his sufferings in hospital,
when she supported his first steps on his return to health and strength,
and when she turned her beloved face to him in full confidence.

They made their way down into the park.

"My father tells me that last night again your life was in great
danger," she said.

Her voice was shaken by intense emotion, and he saw a tear spring from
her beautiful eyes. He forgot the infamous past and the impossible
future. He lived through an exquisite moment. He was loved at that hour
and in that place, and straightway he separated that hour and place from
every other hour and place. The arm of his beloved trembled against his.
He forgot everything. He was a happy man for a space, and he lifted his
eyes to heaven in a frenzy of gratitude.

What did he say next? What words had he uttered? They could only have
been trivial, since they had no connection with what was passing in his
heart. He told the story, perhaps, of the night before; he spoke,
perhaps, of other things. What he said was of no consequence. His words
fell in silence, and they could not come between their twin souls,
responsive only to the mute rhythm of their love.

How, in that moment of exaltation, could he see behind him a rival whose
eyes were gleaming with hatred? Count de Gorbio stood beside M. de la
Boulays on the terrace, and what he saw and heard made him swell with
suppressed anger.

He saw Françoise walking arm in arm with Didier and heard M. de la
Boulays telling him that it was in vain that he had endeavored to induce
his daughter to fix a date for the marriage.

"But I say, what did she reply?"

"She made no reply at all. She left me to meet Captain d'Haumont."

The Count could not repress a gesture of fury. Nevertheless the two men
ceased talking, for the Captain and Françoise, summoned by the dinner
bell, were coming up the steps to the terrace.

D'Haumont was placed next to Françoise at dinner, and the Count was
seated opposite them. He at once turned the conversation to the subject
of gold-diggers, and the hazards which attended their enterprises, and,
in particular, the unfortunate necessity which forced persons who were
out there to mix with the lowest type of adventurers.

"That's true," agreed d'Haumont, without betraying the least agitation.
"Count de Gorbio knows the manners and customs of the country as if he
had lived there."

The conversation could not continue for long in such a strain without
the fear of some altercation arising during the dinner. The enmity of
the two men was so obvious that the guests exchanged astonished glances.
What were they about to witness?

M. de la Boulays was conscious of the danger and did not conceal his
anxiety. Françoise, on the other hand, maintained her composure. She
asked Count de Gorbio to tell them in his usual charming manner some of
his theatrical anecdotes, which would change the subject from that of
spies and savages.

"For my part, I wish to be enlightened," protested the Count. "One never
knows what may happen in life. Is it true that you went out there
without a sou and came back as rich as a nabob?"

Before Didier had time to reply Françoise took it upon herself to
interpose.

"Captain d'Haumont is a poorer man now than he was before he went out.
He gave all his fortune in addition to shedding some of his blood for
France."

A murmur of approval passed through the room. It was as much as the
guests could do not to break forth into applause.

"Captain d'Haumont is a hero and the most disinterested man of my
acquaintance," rejoined the Count. "I am very pleased to number myself
among his friends."

This sudden and unexpected change of front did not deceive any one.
Nevertheless it put an end, for the time being, to a situation which was
one of great delicacy for M. and Mlle. de la Boulays, whom every one was
watching. It was easy to understand the cause of the quarrel, and the
reason of the animosity which had brought about a contest between the
two men.

M. de la Boulays himself grew increasingly uncomfortable. He could not
make out his daughter's attitude. She had suddenly shown a violent
hostility to the Count, and the problem for him was why, if she were
animated by such feelings, she had bestowed her hand upon him.

He determined to get her to unburden herself to him, for he was an
extremely worthy man, and though his interests were bound up in certain
business matters with those of de Gorbio, he would not have seen his
daughter unhappy on any account. And, moreover, if she were in love with
d'Haumont she had but to confess it.

When they rose from the table to retire to the drawing-room, Mlle. de la
Boulays took d'Haumont's arm and asked him to go with her into the park
for a breath of fresh air of which she stood in need. She did not omit,
as she left the room, to apologize gracefully to the Count for
monopolizing the attention of "his friend."

"He is my patient," she said, "and I want to give him my last
injunctions."

"Do you' know that you were very disagreeable to my future husband?" she
said when they were alone. "If you don't like him, it would be a mistake
not to tell me so seeing that I accepted him on your advice! But nothing
is lost yet. There is still time to choose a different one if this one
does not please you!" She did not give him time to reply. "And now," she
added quickly, "you must go and say good-by to my father and start off
if you want to catch your train. The small racing-car will take you to
the station."

It was she now who was urging him to depart, eager to see him leave the
Château. Obviously she dreaded any sort of encounter between the two
men. But at that moment Count de Gorbio appeared before them.

"M. de la Boulays wishes to speak to you, Mademoiselle. He asked me to
come and tell you so." And he added in a somewhat sharper tone, "You
must forgive me for disturbing, in this way, your last conversation."

"But you are not disturbing it, I assure you, my dear Count. Be kind
enough, Captain d'Haumont, to take me to my father."

The Count let them pass out of sight. He was seeing red.

A quarter of an hour later d'Haumont left the house in the racing car. A
break-down occurred on the way, and he reached the station only to see
the express "on the move." The next train did not leave until the
following morning, and he put up at an hotel in the town. He had not
been in his room for more than five minutes when a knock came at the
door. He opened it.

It proved to be Count de Gorbio, who bowed politely and apologized for
disturbing him at such an hour, but he was convinced that when the
Captain knew the reason of his haste, he would not bear him any
ill-will. The matter in question was this: Count de Gorbio had always
held that a man's honor was the most valuable thing in the world, and as
his honor had been affronted by Captain d'Haumont's remarks, he had come
without delay to demand satisfaction.

Captain d'Haumont listened to him with absolute composure. He answered
that the Count's errand greatly astonished him, for he was not aware in
what way he could have caused him any personal annoyance.

"There have been many things, Monsieur, which I do not feel called upon
to explain, but among others you used a certain phrase about adventurers
which you would not have finished if I had not been held back by respect
for my host."

"Monsieur," broke in d'Haumont, in a frigid tone, "the remark was made
by you and I merely replied to it. But it will serve. You want a duel.
Very well, you shall have one when peace is signed. Until then my life
belongs to my country."

"I quite expected that excuse. It's easy to say that. We don't know when
peace will be signed. We may both of us be old men by then. Hang it all,
the armistice is good enough for me, and I am so constituted that the
thought of holding over indefinitely the remembrance of so unpardonable
an affront, makes me furious. I want to kill you at once, Captain
d'Haumont."

"I say again that for the time being my life belongs to my country."

"Mlle. de la Boulays told us that you had shed half your blood for your
country. I claim the other half. When a man knows that he cannot fight,
or chooses not to fight, he behaves himself accordingly, and keeps to
himself the ill opinion that he may have formed of his neighbor."

Captain d'Haumont did not answer the Count. He pointed to the door.

Then Count de Gorbio, with a slow movement, drew off a heavy motor-glove
and struck him with it across the face.

The scene changed in a flash. Didier took the Count in his formidable
hands, lifted him, swung him, and was about to break his head against
the wall when the Count, in his terror, bellowed the one thing that
could save him.

"Coward, afraid of my pistol."

Didier let him drop.

"Very well," he said, "I'll fight you."

During this time Mlle. de la Boulays was searching the Château for de
Gorbio, and was in a fever of anxiety as to what had become of him.

She learned that he had set out in one of the motor-cars with the hood
up. M. de la Boulays was in his study, unconscious of what was
happening. At that juncture the small racing car returned, and the
chauffeur told Françoise that Captain d'Haumont had missed the train
and had ordered him to drive to an hotel.

She sprang into the car, a prey to the gloomiest forebodings. It seemed
a forgone conclusion to her that de Gorbio, furious at the manner in
which she had openly slighted him and with Didier for his attitude
towards him, was in pursuit with a view of challenging him. The deed,
perhaps, was already done. Her memory harked back to the Count's
wonderful prowess with the pistol, and she shuddered. Besides, she had
learned with certainty that his car had preceded her by an hour. . . .

Her feeling of anguish increased every moment almost to the point of
suffocation. She was convinced that the two men were in the very act of
fighting. They could not even wait until the next morning!

When she reached the hotel and discovered that Didier was in his room
safe and sound, she wept tears of joy. She ran up to his room and
knocked wildly at the door. The Captain himself opened it.

"You're going to fight a duel," she burst out, addressing him in the
familiar second person which spoke volumes for their love which, when
they were alone, had never been in question. They both remained as
motionless as statues. "Forgive me," she went on, while a deep blush
mantled her cheeks. "Oh, forgive me." And she sank into a chair, sobbing
aloud.

"Yes, Françoise, it's true. I'm fighting a duel to-morrow morning."

"Oh, good heavens!" she cried. And then, with a look of dismay: "What
are you fighting with? Pistols? You saw what that wretched man can do
with a pistol. He will kill you."

"Yes," answered Didier simply, transfigured by an immense joy. "Yes, he
will kill me. . . . There's no way out of it. But I shall die the
happiest of men because you came to me."

She rose from her chair and took his hands in hers.

"You will not fight. I don't want it and you don't want it. You must not
fight. You are a soldier. In war time a soldier fights only against the
enemy. You would be guilty of an act of treason if you were to fight.
No, no; you will not fight."

"But, my dear girl, I said all that to him and he struck me in the
face."

"He laid hands on you! He dared to strike you, and is still alive!"

"Why, you see, Françoise, you, no more than I, would consent to live
after that. No, my love, he is still alive because, when I was about to
smash his head against the wall, he taunted me with being afraid of his
pistol. You see, yourself, that I must fight him."

"No, no; never. . . . The man is a murderer."

"We should have fought before now if we could have found any seconds. We
had to postpone the meeting. He is taking everything on himself. Both of
us will have the necessary seconds. And now go back to your father, and
keep silent about the whole matter. I have an hour left in which to
write to you--to write to you at great length."

"Why write to me? Why do you suddenly change your tone? Why do you again
assume the coldness which has already caused me so much pain? You have
but to say one word to me--the word which you have never yet said."

"It is to tell you why I have never said that word that I want to write
to you."

"And afterwards you'll fight?"

"I shall fight."

"That means you don't love me, Didier. Alas, my love, you have never
loved me. And yet you know that I have loved you from the first day
that I saw you . . . and you have done nothing but make me weep."

"That's true," returned Didier. "But you are so good that I am certain
you will forgive me."

He sat down and, leaning with his elbows on the table, placed his hands
before his face as if to shut out the vision of her for the last time.
When he looked up again she was gone.

Then he began to write. His letter was a confession and a testament; one
long wail of sorrow and love.

At daybreak, when d'Haumont entered the forest, Count de Gorbio and the
four seconds whom he had undertaken to obtain were already waiting for
him and he had the sensation of being face to face with a firing-party.

Those four men--the seconds--wore an ominous look, as if they knew that
they were about to engage in an ugly business. The duel was occurring in
such peculiar circumstances that de Gorbio must have had some difficulty
in finding accomplices. It was not a pleasant sight for any one, except
a German, to see a man shoot down a Captain in the French army, wounded
in the war and not a little famous on account of his deeds. Count de
Gorbio must have had to pay them a good price to induce them to act as
seconds.

Nevertheless, the seconds, anticipating some future unpleasantness, were
anxious that the duel should be fought strictly in accordance with the
rules. They expressed regret that d'Haumont had not brought a case of
pistols with him, but as he accepted, without demur, the pistols
belonging to his opponent, they decided to go on. Captain d'Haumont's
seconds took the greatest care to see that the weapons were properly
loaded. They drew lots and fate decreed that one of his seconds should
take charge of the combat, and he offered the Captain a few words of
advice.

It was obvious that he was quite in his element. He turned down the thin
line of white collar which could be seen above the blue of d'Haumont's
jacket. He counselled him to stand sideways under cover of his right
arm, and to bend it over his chest so that it might serve as a shield;
and to fire standing in that position when the command was given, so
that Count de Gorbio would not have time to take aim between the words,
"One, two, three, and fire!" Of course, such precipitation would mean
that he would be firing a little at random, but it was his only chance
of saving his life, for there was no use hiding the fact that if Count
de Gorbio were given time to take aim d'Haumont would be a dead man.

The second did not express in so many words an opinion which was shared
by every one else, but he clearly hinted as much.

The seconds counted the paces. The adversaries were placed face to face.
After the usual preliminaries, the word of command, "Fire!" rang out.
Captain d'Haumont did not display any undue haste, but gave Count de
Gorbio his full time and fired abstractedly, almost simultaneously with
him.

He had recommended his soul to God and thought of Françoise for the
last time. He expected to be struck to the ground. What was his
stupefaction to see Count de Gorbio turn right round. The Count swayed
for a second and then fell his length with his face on the sward. The
seconds rushed up, followed by a gentleman whom the Captain had not
previously observed, and who, it seemed, was the doctor.

At that moment a woman's cry was heard, and Françoise appeared on the
scene. She came hurrying up apparently to prevent the duel, and hearing
the shots, she was shrieking all the more despairingly, feeling certain
that she had arrived too late. It is only in fiction and plays that the
heroine can calculate her time with such nicety that she appears on the
ground at the psychological moment and glides in front of a pistol to
receive the shot which was intended for the man she loves.

Nevertheless, when Mlle. de la Boulays had made sure that the body which
lay on the grass was the Count's, and that d'Haumont was uninjured, she
in no way regretted her late arrival. She flung herself into Didier's
arms.

"It is the judgment of God!"

These words coming from the beloved lips made an immense impression on
d'Haumont, and affected him to a greater degree than the duel itself.

"The judgment of God!" It was true that God had been on his side in the
battle, so that he had miraculously escaped the Count's unerring pistol,
while the Count was struck down by a bullet which had no chance of
hitting him!

It was fated, therefore, that he should live. It was fated that he
should love. It was shown that he had sufficiently suffered; made
sufficient atonement. God, by removing that man from his path, had
thrown that splendid girl into his arms, and she alone uttered the only
words that were able to decide his destiny.

The judgment of God!

It was an inspiring thought and overwhelmed him with an exultation which
may easily be imagined; while Françoise's tears of joy, the clasp of
her arms, the wonderful elation which seized him as he felt that he was
on the threshold of a new life, illumined by love, took him out of
himself--and he listened but absent-mindedly to the remarks of the
seconds who were telling him that Count de Gorbio was not dead, but that
he was not very far from it.

They raised their hats, and he returned the salute without quite knowing
what he was about. And he allowed himself to be dragged away by
Françoise.

Some weeks later she led him to the altar. The marriage made a great
stir. It was one of the smartest among the war-weddings. As the wedding
party emerged into the church square, bathed in the warm light, it was
as though the sun of victory had risen that morning expressly to shine
on Captain d'Haumont and his radiant bride.

They descended the main staircase amidst a murmur of admiration from a
fashionably dressed crowd. As in the case of all marriages of wealthy
people, a few eager beggars and down-at-heel loafers congregated here
and there on the pavement. One of them climbed the gilded gate in order
to see better, and his movements were like the contortions of a crab.
Standing near him a squalid-looking peddler of rugs, carrying his bundle
of trash on his shoulders, stared at the procession with not less
interest. Captain d'Haumont was in the seventh heaven and had no eyes
for earthly sights, nor did he hear the words that were spoken in an
undertone by an over-dressed man to his companion, who might have been a
sheriff's clerk and looked rather shabby:

"Well, what do you think about it, Joker?"

"I think he is now ripe, Parisian."




CHAPTER XV

THE HONEYMOON


The moon--Captain and Madame d'Haumont's honeymoon--rose with its soft
refulgence over the silver waves at Villefranche, at the extremity of
Cape Ferrat, between Nice and Monte Carlo. It was here, in the seclusion
of the fragrant gardens of "Thalassa," the splendid villa which M. de la
Boulays possessed on the azure coast of the Mediterranean, that they had
hidden their great and new-found happiness.

Leaning on the beflowered balcony the happy couple listened in silence
to the moaning of the sea breaking itself at the foot of the hills which
watched over this enchanted bay. The dark mass of two vessels lay
heavily asleep on their gleaming bed in the beautiful night.

Only the faint splash of two oars causing a light swirl of glistening
foam could be heard from the roadstead, and a boat passed so near as to
be almost at their feet.

"How pleasant it would be to have a row on the sea at this delightful
hour," murmured Françoise.

She had scarcely given expression to the wish when Didier hailed the
fisherman who was rowing the boat and asked him to wait. They made their
way down the steps which led to the beach, and the man, having consented
by a gesture to take them with him, they were soon gliding over the
surface of the waves, which were flowing out to the headland of Cape
Ferrat.

"Do you often fish at this hour?" questioned Françoise. "I believe I
caught sight of you yesterday pulling round the point."

The man answered only with a grunt.

"Certainly our sailor is no gossip," said Françoise in a whisper to
Didier.

They did not again speak to him. They even completely forgot his
existence. Didier's arm gently stole round Françoise's waist. Her head
lay on his shoulder. A soft and scented breeze was wafted from the
gardens at Saint Jean and the terraces at Beaulieu. Their lips met in
the glad night as though they were alone.

The uncouth fisherman, a few feet away from them, was deemed as of no
importance. Moreover he looked half asleep as he bent over his oars,
drowsing in the huge muffler which covered his face. But the man was not
slumbering, and in the innermost recesses of his mind he thought: "Love
each other. Rejoice like children who are free from care while
Chéri-Bibi keeps watch. Let nothing disturb the happiness which you
have wrested from fate. I, too, have known those divine moments. I, too,
have known what it is to be kissed by a beloved wife. I, too, have felt
a beautiful form yield in my arms. I, too, have heard a lover's sighs.
Alas, there is an end to all things! Make haste! The most delightful
nights are not far distant from the blackest chaos. The abyss lies under
your feet. Forget it! Forget it. Nut, as long as you can! I have come
from a great distance to remove from your path the cowardly forms
clinging to your shadow who are lying in wait for you as for a quarry.
Pray to your God in whom you believe, because your cup of happiness is
full, that I may save you from evil before even you suspect its
presence. Alas, nothing comes more swiftly in the world than misfortune.
You are right to forget it lest your fondest kisses be fraught with
bitter tears."

Thus Chéri-Bibi's thoughts flowed on in the lyrical and affected style
which was usual with him when the occasion did not call upon him to
express himself in the most frightful slang.

Those who have known as he knew, both sides of life as a result of
complications which they have not sought, and which have sent them
astray from their early path, find themselves again with a suddenness
which cannot surprise them, either with a heart full of the joys of
former times, or else wearing a hideous mask under which Fatality
endeavors to suppress their former selves without entirely succeeding.

Chéri-Bibi half saw what was passing in the Nut's elated mind. He was
at that moment entirely transported with gratitude to Providence, the
Giver of life and death, who had imposed on him such sore trials and
made such splendid amends.

This secret pæan to the mighty spirit of goodness rose all the higher,
inasmuch as the Nut could consider himself henceforward safe from a
recurrence of his evil fortune. As far as the world was concerned the
Nut was dead, Chéri-Bibi thought. The newspapers, some months before,
had published the glad news:

"The tragedy of the murder of a well-known banker by Raoul de Saint
Dalmas," it was reported, "is now doubtless forgotten by the public. It
may be stated that the prisoner succeeded in escaping from the convict
settlement, but the Penitentiary Authorities have been able to satisfy
themselves beyond any doubt that the miscreant perished in the primeval
forest like so many other convicts who have attempted the same venture."

No endeavor would be made to search further for him, and since he had
learned from the same source, on his arrival in Europe, that the men who
in Cayenne were called the Burglar, the Parisian, the Caid and the Joker
had been recaptured, together with the notorious Chéri-Bibi, he had
every reason to believe that the past contained no menace for him.

He was confident, moreover, that he owed his perfect security to
Chéri-Bibi, and at those moments when his thoughts reverted to him, he
vowed an even deeper gratitude to him.

"Be happy, Nut! You will learn all too soon, if you are to learn it,
that your old companions in bondage escaped once again after four years
of imprisonment, showing greater cunning this time, for they managed to
return to France, and were present at your wedding. Oh, if you had known
it! How you would have invoked in your prayers the demon of darkness who
alone can save you, and whom, in the natural selfishness of your
happiness, you no longer wished even to remember."

* * * * *

Françoise loved adornment and admiration, and Didier was delighted, for
he thought, with some reason, that a woman without elegance and style
was a woman without charm.

During the early months of the war, Mlle. de la Boulays restricted
herself with a veritable enthusiasm to the greatest simplicity in dress.
But, in truth, could she claim that she was devoted to her Red Cross
costume solely because it served to remind her of her duties to
humanity? Did she entirely ignore the fact that it suited her to
perfection?

Her engagement, and then her marriage, which was a society event,
afforded her more than a sufficient reason for returning to her former
tastes, so that she found herself once more devoting herself to matters
of toilet and dress. The fact, moreover, in no way detracted from her
more solid qualities.

Captain d'Haumont was delighted to accompany his wife when she went
shopping or visited her dressmaker. And when they were in Nice, after
sauntering through the Promenade des Anglais, he never failed to bring
her back to the verdant avenue where behind the great shop-fronts
bloomed the latest fashions.

On that day they went to Violette's to see a certain dress in white
voile embroidered with pearls upon which Françoise had been casting
longing eyes. The elder of the sisters, Violette, had just returned from
their principal branch in Paris, bringing with her every kind of
fashionable wonder. Françoise had not visited Violette's during the
war. But she knew the two sisters well, and she was quite surprised to
see the elder one put out her hand to Didier with a pleasant smile. So
Didier also knew her! So Didier used to visit the millinery shops before
his marriage! With a charming pout, lifting in mock-seriousness a
threatening finger, she remarked upon the fact.

"Don't scold us, Madame," said the elder Mlle. Violette with a smile.
"It's a great secret between Captain d'Haumont and me. But as it's the
secret of a good action, you must not ask me to tell you about it."

"I insist on knowing what it is," said Françoise gaily. "A husband
ought not to have any secrets from his wife."

"After all, you're quite right, Madame, and well . . . the secret
is . . ."

At that juncture a girl appeared from the other end of the shop. She was
wearing an exquisite dress which Françoise at once gazed upon
enraptured. She did not even bestow a glance at the face of the wearer.
A mannequin in the flesh means little more to the customers than a
mannequin in dummy.

Nevertheless she was obliged to take stock of that handsome face with
its refined and aristocratic outline, for the girl, catching sight of
Captain d'Haumont, uttered a cry of joy, and blushing with pleasure went
quickly up to him with outstretched hand. And then, doubtless feeling
that her gesture was indiscreet, she stopped short and murmured, almost
stammering:

"Oh, Captain d'Haumont! . . . How is it you're here?"

"What about you?" returned d'Haumont. "Have you been in Nice long?"

"I brought her with me from Paris yesterday," interposed Mlle. Violette.
"We needed a few mannequins, and I took her away from the cash desk so
as to have her taught a new business here. She does all that we want. We
are very pleased with our favorite, Captain d'Haumont."

"My dear," said Captain d'Haumont, turning to his wife, who did not know
what to say or what to think, and who remained standing somewhat
nonplussed by the mystery, "I want you to be very nice to Mlle. Giselle
who is quite worthy of it. It's a story which I will tell you later."

"A very pathetic story, Madame," interposed Mlle. Violette, "and one
that redounds to your husband's credit."

Giselle bowed gracefully to Madame d'Haumont. "I will try to deserve
your kindness, Madame and Monsieur," she said with great simplicity.
"When my mother and I heard of Captain d'Haumont's marriage we both of
us prayed for your happiness."

"She is delightful, this child," said Françoise, as she shook her
warmly by the hand. "And how pretty she is!" Then, turning to her
husband with an adorable pout:

"I don't know what you did to make them so grateful to you, but you know
how to choose the people to whom to do good turns, my dear Didier."

When they left the shop Françoise, who was agog with the greatest
curiosity, asked him what it all meant.

"Be quick, tell me. You know that I am jealous, you brigand."

D'Haumont was much amused by her impatience. He assumed an air of
detachment.

"My dear, it's a secret which belongs to that young girl," he said. "I
really don't know if I can----"

"Oh, you're making game of me! That's not the old Didier. Think of the
confidence that I have in you. We go into a shop and the first mannequin
that we see throws herself into your arms and I don't scratch her eyes
out."

"That would have been a pity, for they are very nice eyes," said Didier.

"Yes, she has extremely nice blue eyes and an expression of gentle
sadness which haunts one, it's true. Oh, you're an excellent judge. I
congratulate you! All the same, you must admit that I am a good sort. Do
I know what you did before our marriage?"

"Françoise!" rapped out Didier in a muffled voice. The word was uttered
in such a tone of reproach that Françoise stopped teasing him. She saw
that he was very pale and painfully upset.

"Good gracious, I didn't know that I should be hurting your feelings
like that."

He took her hand and pressed it gently.

"My dearest," he said, "I will tell you all about her, but never forget
that since the day that I first saw you, there's never been any other
woman in the world for me but you."

"I believe you, my Didier."

Nothing more was said while they remained among the fashionably dressed
crowd which assembles between eleven o'clock and midday on the Promenade
de la Baie des Anges. But as soon as they were alone on the terrace,
which was usually deserted at that time, and which, skirting the
Château, leads to the harbor, Didier told Françoise what he knew of
Giselle and how he came to know her.

The incident occurred on an occasion when he was home on leave. He was
"pulling himself together" from the fatigues of the front in a small
flat which he had taken on his arrival in Paris. It was in the
Luxembourg quarter, facing the gardens, of which he was very fond, and
which served to remind him of the happiest days of his boyhood.

One day as he left his flat he was arrested by a most mournful
procession which was descending from the attic above. Some poor devil
was being taken to his last resting place. A young girl was walking
behind the coffin. She was in tears, and was so weak that obviously she
had the greatest difficulty to hold herself upright. She was alone or
almost alone. Didier offered her his assistance. She clung to his arm in
her distress with an ingenuous confidence that deeply touched him. He
took her thus to the cemetery, and brought her back home again.

It was not until they were in the house that she seemed to notice the
assistance which a stranger had rendered her.

"Oh, monsieur, it's very good of you," she said, and as they were now
indoors she made her escape and went upstairs to her attic.

Captain d'Haumont questioned the porter's wife. He learned that
Giselle's father had suffered from an illness--consumption--which was
practically incurable. Thus he had not been able to work for two years,
and her mother was crippled, so that the young girl could only maintain
her unhappy family by the most grinding toil. Scarcely being able to
leave them, she was forced to wear herself out with needlework at home,
and earned barely enough to keep the wolf from the door.

D'Haumont knew the elder of the Violette sisters, for one of her
nephews, a second lieutenant, had served under him; and amid the dangers
of the campaign they had struck up a friendship. He called upon this
worthy lady and asked her if she could find a situation for an honest
girl who would be worthy of her trust. Mlle. Violette, as it happened,
had a vacancy for a cashier. And that was how Giselle came to enter one
of the principal dressmaking establishments in Paris, and her mother and
herself to be extricated from poverty. In the course of a year, assisted
by her youth, Giselle won back her health. In a word, she blossomed
forth into the beautiful young girl whom Françoise had just seen. Mlle.
Violette, realizing how graceful she was, sometimes took her away from
the cash desk and dressed her as her most valuable mannequin, for she
set off to advantage their most sensational "confections."

"And now, my dear Françoise, you know as much as I do about Giselle."

"You always will be the best of men," returned Françoise,
affectionately pressing his arm. "Men are only as good as that in
popular novels and plays," she added with an arch smile.

"You are laughing at me," said the Nut in a tone of surprise, slightly
vexed. But she grew entirely serious again.

"I adore you, my Didier."

They retraced their steps, for it was now lunch time. As they turned
round they almost ran into a singular-looking person, with a
copper-colored skin, and eyes devoid of eyebrows but protected from the
glare of the sun by large yellow glasses. This peculiar individual was
dressed entirely in white linen; and he wore white shoes and a gray
bowler hat. Didier could not help giving a start when his eyes fell upon
him.

"How very much like Yoyo he is!" he said to himself.

But the idea no sooner flashed upon him than he realized how ridiculous
and unpardonable it was to let his thoughts wander back to the men and
things of the primeval forest while walking on the Promenade des
Anglais.

"Did you notice that man?" asked Françoise, laughing. "There's an
eccentric for you! Do you know who he is? From what I hear, he is a
genuine redskin, a celebrated surgeon-dentist from Chicago who has just
opened a consulting-room in Nice. How would you like to have a redskin
as your dentist? Personally, I should be afraid of his sending me to
sleep and then scalping me. Madame d'Erlande told me, the other day,
that the women here are crazy about him, and that he has already secured
the smartest people in the foreign colony as his patients."

Captain d'Haumont smiled and turned round to have another look at him.
The man was still walking some twenty paces behind them, smoking a
cigarette.

A few days later a charitable fête was held in Cimiez, in the beautiful
gardens of the Château de Valrose, standing on the hills which tower
above Nice. Madame d'Erlande was one of the chief organizers of the
fête, and she invited Françoise, whom she had known since she was a
little girl, and for whom she had always shown a great affection, to
take charge of a stall. Françoise could not well refuse. Didier went
with her. He allowed her to sell his choicest tobacco with all the
reckless and charming freedom which the holder of a tobacco stall is
expected to show in an affair of the sort.

He wandered among the clumps of trees, strolled through the sham Roman
ruins, and drew near and entered the Château de Valrose almost at the
same time as the redskin, who was surrounded by a regular "court" of
smart women. He knew the man's name now, for it was to be heard on every
hand. He called himself Herbert Ross.

They went into the theater at the same time. The surgeon-dentist from
Chicago took a seat in front of him, next to a woman whose appearance
seemed to be familiar to him. She chattered incessantly to the redskin
and did her utmost to arouse his interest. But with his usual unruffled
calm he replied to her only in monosyllables. That was his method.
Moreover, it was stated that he could only speak a black man's broken
lingo.

At that juncture a celebrated Russian diva sang Gluck's "Alceste." She
secured a great triumph, and was followed by sundry instrumental pieces
on the piano, harp and violin. Finally it was announced that the
celebrated Nina Noha would appear in her character dances.

Didier gave a start when he heard her name. He had often seen mention of
her in the newspapers since his return to France. He was fully aware
that the dancer, was still much courted, or at least that the
fascination which the great public in Paris found in her who used to be
Raoul de Saint Dalmas's mistress had in no sense diminished. The war had
made no difference to her. On the one hand were those who fought, and on
the other those who idled away their time.

Nevertheless it struck him that Nina Noha must have changed in the
course of fifteen years. If he had been bent on it, he could have seen
for himself. It would have been easy for him to have found an
opportunity. But he did not seek her out--far from it. In spite of the
image which was reflected in his mirror, and showed him a Didier who in
no way resembled the old Raoul, he could not help shuddering with a
peculiar dread at the thought of finding himself confronted by a
countenance which used to be so familiar to him. Suppose she recognized
him! Repeat to himself that the thing was impossible as he might, he had
none the less procured some tortoiseshell-rimmed dark glasses in order
to take refuge behind those glasses should any sudden encounter place
him in an embarrassing position.

Nina Noha! She was the origin of all his misery. What follies he had
committed for the woman whom he now held in horror!

She came on to the stage. What a marvel she was! She had not changed in
the least. She still possessed her fatal beauty. Her eyes, her great
dark, blazing eyes still held their disturbing fire. Her movements were
still as lithe, as voluptuous, as before. She was still as young as
ever.

Nina Noha danced in a Parisian robe which revealed her figure more
completely than if she had worn a Corinthian tunic. What were Didier's
real feelings as he gazed at that apparition? Did they betoken the death
of his former passion for her? Was he mourning over himself? Did he see
in her the hated cause of all his woes?

He clapped his hands like everybody else, hardly knowing what he was
doing. Five minutes later, at the sound of a voice which, likewise had
undergone no change, he came to himself from his musings.

"Well, doctor, are you satisfied?"

The woman who had sat in front of him and whose back alone he had seen
while she chattered to the "doctor," was no other than Nina Noha.

Didier instinctively put on his dark glasses. She had come back to her
seat. She had danced solely to please the redskin. At least he gathered
as much from her talk which he could not but overhear. But the Captain
was no longer listening to her voice. He was staring at her.

He was staring at the nape of her neck, the sight of which at one time
distracted him. Even now he could not remove his eyes from it, but it
was not the living flesh that held him, it was not the perfumed neck
which he was wont to cover with kisses that he now gazed upon. His eyes
were fixed on the necklace fastened round her neck.

Lord above, he had known a necklace with pearls like that! It was a long
time ago . . . a very long time ago. It was more than fifteen years ago.
Yes, he had held in his hand gems which were so like them that they
might easily be mistaken for those which were round Nina's neck. He had
held pearls in his hand like them on the day when the banker had passed
to him, so that he might judge their brilliance, the necklace which once
belonged to the Queen of Carynthia.

Oh, how he longed to count the number of pearls in it! That particular
necklace--the fact had been repeated often enough during the trial for
the Nut to remember it--contained sixty pearls. Such was the necklace
which, if the Public Prosecutor was to be believed, Raoul de Saint
Dalmas had stolen, and to obtain which he had not scrupled to murder his
employer!

It was enough to strike any man to the very heart suddenly to see before
his eyes, after fifteen years, a necklace like it . . . exactly like it
. . . for after all, suppose it were one and the same?

"I am wandering in my mind," he thought, Nina Noha! A pearl necklace!
Raynaud's murder! . . . All these things were whirling in Didier's poor
brain.

"It's not surprising that I cannot see a necklace without thinking of
the other one," he thought to himself. "But the other one contained a
certain pearl, a pearl with a flaw in it, a pearl which had lost its
luster. M. Raynaud pointed it out to me. True, I myself remember the
particular pearl. It was not perfectly round either. True, I see it in
my mind's eye still. . . . But here I cannot see it at all!

"Am I going mad? Haven't I yet done staring at that necklace, trying to
count how many pearls there are in it? Why do I not at once cry aloud to
the people in this theater: 'Cannot you recognize me? I am Raoul de
Saint Dalmas. I was condemned to death for the murder of the owner of
that necklace. I insist on this woman telling me where she got it
from.'"

He was afraid of himself. He left the theater. By a curious coincidence
Nina Noha came out after him. She was no longer with the redskin but was
attended by a showily dressed "gentleman" who, however, left her almost
at once, and to whom she said:

"See you this evening, my dear de Saynthine. . . ."

At that moment Didier encountered his wife's friend, Madame d'Erlande,
who likewise was leaving the theatre, and she stopped to speak to him.

She was a vivacious and sprightly, and somewhat mature woman, who wore a
smile from which youth had fled. She was not devoid of wit, nor of love
of mischief, nor, in particular, of malice. She liked to tease the
enamored. She had assisted at Françoise's wedding with immense
enjoyment; and she never failed to say, when she caught her giving her
husband an adoring look:

"Make the most of it, my dear. Make the most of it. One can never tell
how long it will last with those gentlemen."

She was reputed, moreover, to have had not a little experience in love
affairs, and malicious tongues declared that in her time she had rarely
allowed to slip from her the opportunity of putting to test the
constancy of man.

"Well," she said to Didier, "what do you think of our little fête? I
noticed just now that you were by no means boring yourself. You were
taking an enormous pleasure in watching Nina Noha dance."

"Upon my word," returned Didier, forcing himself to reply by a resolute
effort of will so as to appear natural, for, at the mention of her name,
Nina Noha turned her head and was eyeing him with considerable interest,
"upon my word, she certainly dances extremely well."

"She is undoubtedly one of our most beautiful actresses. Ah, you
brigand, she was in front of you. I was watching you. You never took
your eyes from her. But I shall tell Françoise the whole story. I must
put the little innocent on her guard."

Nina Noha passed them with an air of supreme unconcern. Well, Madame
d'Erlande could let her tongue run on as she pleased. Nina Noha had not
recognized him.




CHAPTER XVI

CHÉRI-BIBI'S SIMPLE PROGRAMME


The same evening, a few minutes before the arrival of the train from
Paris, a man in livery was walking up and down the platform of the
railway station at Nice. He wore a cap with a glazed leather peak, which
hid from sight one eye, while the other was covered with a large black
band wound round his head.

Not only could very little be caught of the man's face, but people
might, with good reason, ask themselves whether he was able to
distinguish anything himself. Nevertheless his heavy but confident tread
bore witness, in spite of the manner in which he was muffled up, to the
fact that he retained a clear perception of what was passing round him.
He avoided groups of passengers, the porters, the station-master, and
even the commissary of police!

When the train entered the station, he posted himself near the way out
and imperturbably watched travelers march past him carrying their
luggage. Now and again, for he had chosen a somewhat dark corner, he was
jostled by the crowd, but he stood stock still as firm as a rock.

Suddenly he stepped forward, thrust out his arm, and laid hold of a
remarkably tall, lean man who was wearing an immense, loose overcoat.

The man gave a start and murmured:

"Oh, it's you, Monsieur le Marq----"

The other gave him a dig in the ribs which checked his flow of words and
manifestations of pleasure.

"Did you have a pleasant journey, Monsieur Hilaire?" asked the servant,
seizing the bag from the hands of the traveler in the flowing overcoat.

"Very pleasant indeed, Monsieur le----"

"Call me Casimir, you ass!"

"Yes, Monsieur Casimir. But I don't want you to carry my bag. I am not
at all tired. One can travel very comfortably in these first-class
carriages. I never want to travel again in anything but a first-class
carriage."

"Dry up!" growled Monsieur Casimir.

Hilaire did not speak again. When they reached the Avenue de la Gare,
and were abreast of Notre Dame, the servant said to the new-comer:

"Now you can talk."

"Well, that's a good thing," sighed Hilaire, "because I have several
things to tell you, Monsieur le Marq----Casimir! First of all, let me
thank you for enabling me to realize the greatest dream of my life: a
trip to the blue waters of the Mediterranean."

"Did your wife offer any objection to your leaving her. Monsieur
Hilaire?"

"She did everything that she could think of to prevent me from getting
away. But she had to bow to the inevitable when I told her that I was
entrusted by the Government with a secret mission to supply the
Mediterranean seaboard with macaroni! . . . But even that didn't pass
without some unpleasant remarks, and she foretold a number of dire
disasters, such as the train running off the lines, an earthquake, and a
few epidemics. But I don't want to think of those disagreeable moments.
I am at Nice. I see before me the land of the sun."

"You will see it to-morrow morning," corrected Chéri-Bibi. "Meantime,
we will go and have a bit of dinner together. I have nothing to do. My
master has given me the evening off!"

"Your master! So you have a master now. I imagined that your uniform was
only for show. I know, Monsieur le Marquis, that you always had a fancy
for assuming a disguise, and even in the time of----"

"Are you sober, Dodger?"

"I beg your pardon. I couldn't help it. I thought I was back again to
those days when you, Monsieur le Marquis, disguised yourself before
proceeding on certain expeditions. And then, it's quite true, this
country, this air intoxicates me. I don't know myself. I am twenty years
younger. I beg your pardon. . . ."

"Listen to me. I am employed as hall-porter by Dr. Herbert Ross, 95 A,
Avenue Victor Hugo. He is a fashionable surgeon-dentist, and has a large
number of smart patients. Remember that, I beg of you. And you, do you
know what you are?"

"Know what I am! I should think I did. I am M. Hilaire, grocer, spending
a holiday on the Riviera, and my one idea is to amuse myself and take
things easy."

They had reached a dingy street which turned into the Place Masséna.
Chéri-Bibi came to a stand before an hotel.

"I've taken a room here in your name. Off with you! I'll wait for you."

Five minutes later Hilaire came out again.

"I've only had time to wash my hands and dip my face in a basin of
water," he said. "Where are we going to dine? I'll stand treat."

Chéri-Bibi took the Dodger to a restaurant, in the old town, famous for
its tripe and light white wines. Hilaire was in the highest spirits.
After dinner he lit a cigar which Chéri-Bibi gave him and he puffed
away at it with great gusto as he threw himself back in his chair.

"You've told me your program," said Chéri-Bibi, putting his elbows on
the table, while the coffee was being served, "and I'm now going to
speak of mine, if you don't mind. I promise you that it will make
another man of you, my dear old Dodger, and you'll fancy we're back
again to the best days of our youth."

"I'm listening, Monsieur Casimir," returned Hilaire, blowing smoke
towards the ceiling and seemingly greatly interested in the rings which
were forming above him.

"I know nothing more likely to make one forget the worries of family
life and the anxieties of business," began Chéri-Bibi by way of
prologue, "than to take a hand in certain schemes in which you have to
bring into play some degree of cunning, presence of mind, coolness, and
a great amount of pluck; in fact, all the qualities which enabled us in
the old days to overcome very considerable difficulties. You cannot have
forgotten them."

"Bless me, Monsieur Casimir, if I understand you aright, your program,
while it offers us some amount of amusement, is not particularly one to
go to sleep on."

"If you want to remain idle while I'm working, you can watch me on the
job," returned Chéri-Bibi in a gruff voice.

"I should have some feeling of remorse, Monsieur Casimir----"

"If you have too much feeling of remorse, you can take the next train
back----"

"Don't be upset, Monsieur Casimir. You know as well as I do that my life
belongs to you. I gave it to you once for all. I owe everything to you.
I am not ungrateful. Tell me what you intend to do," said Hilaire with a
deep sigh. "Is there someone who still stands in your way?"

"Yes, there is someone who still stands in my way, Monsieur Hilaire.
You've hit it in one."

"It's his own lookout," said the grocer with another deep and mournful
sigh. "Yes, it will serve him right. As long as he is in your way, he is
in my way, too! And, look here, I had better tell you right now," added
the Dodger, who realized that it was not the moment for jesting, "that I
shan't be easy in my mind until that someone no longer inconveniences
you. Then we shall be able to enjoy in peace the good things of this
delightful country. Upon my word, I really believe that between us we
shall know how to manage the affair so that he doesn't worry us much
longer."

"I didn't expect anything else from you, my dear Dodger. You must know
then that the person who annoys me is a certain gentleman whose service
you will enter to-morrow as chauffeur."

"Is it possible!" sighed the Dodger. "You've already found me a job as
chauffeur--to start to-morrow morning? What is this particular
gentleman's business?"

"He is a gentleman very comfortably off. He has no business, and his
name is M. de Saynthine."

"I'm much obliged to you, Monsieur, for finding me such a smart post.
Since Monsieur Casimir is hall-porter to a surgeon-dentist, I see no
reason why Monsieur Hilaire shouldn't be chauffeur to an independent
gentleman. What have I got to do?"

"Well, you look after the car as you used to do at my house."

"And then?"

"And then you will keep a watchful eye on everything that's happening
round you."

"And what else?"

"Listen to everything that's said."

"Come, I say, that doesn't sound very difficult."

"Your future governor, M. de Saynthine, is particularly interested in
someone whom you know, my dear Dodger."

"Whom do you mean? I've met so many people since I went into business."

"You remember the man who came and knocked at your door one evening and
mentioned me?"

"Oh, yes, but I don't even know his name."

"His name is Didier d'Haumont He is one of the heroes of the Great War.
Besides, he made a very fine marriage, which was reported in all the
newspapers. When I send you customers. Monsieur Hilaire, I send you the
very best."

"Oh, really! . . . I am very thankful to you. What has my governor, M.
de Saynthine, to do with M. d'Haumont?"

"He has this much to do with him: that he hates him like poison and has
sworn to ruin him, and M. d'Haumont has no suspicion of it, the poor,
dear man."

"Indeed! Well, let him lay hands on anyone who comes to me from you and
says '_Fatalitas!_'"

Chéri-Bibi put his mouth to the Dodger's ear.

"As long as M. de Saynthine lives, your customer, Dodger, won't be safe
for a moment."

M. Hilaire scratched his ear.

"That being so, my governor's number is up," he sighed. "There's another
man who won't make old bones!"

"Yes," growled Chéri-Bibi, "accidents will happen. Oh, by the way, your
governor has a friend, a bit of a braggart, who acts as his factotum and
whose name is Onésime Belon. De Saynthine picked this man, who is an
old pal of his, out of the gutter, and he calls him in private the
Joker, though no one has ever known why."

"Must I keep an eye on him, too?"

"Keep an eye on him! I should think you must keep an eye on him. He is
as dangerous to our friend, the Captain, as your governor is. Our friend
will never have a quiet life so long as this Onésime Belon . . ."

Chéri-Bibi did not finish the sentence, but brought his two hands
together and gave a twist which left no doubt as to the necessity for
disposing of this fellow also.

"Ah, yes, that man too," sighed Hilaire.

"I might as well let you know also that Onésime Belon is mixed up with
a certain second-hand clothes dealer in the old town--that accounts,
perhaps, for his being so shabbily dressed--a man nicknamed the Burglar,
who is easily recognized because he walks sideways like a crab, and
can't hide the fact that one of his shoulders is higher than the other.
This man, the Burglar, calls himself in the old town Monsieur
Toulouse. . . ."

"Does he, too, bear a grudge against Captain d'Haumont?" asked poor
Hilaire with growing anxiety, while the sweat broke over his forehead in
great drops.

"Bear him a grudge! I should think he did bear him a grudge! He has
sworn to ruin him or to cook his goose for him. Listen carefully. All
those fellows are in possession of a certain secret, and they have
determined to blackmail the Captain to the death."

"Blackmail him to the death! Yes, I can understand the whole thing. It's
not very complicated, this blackmail business. . . . So this man the
Burglar . . .?"

"This man the Burglar as well," said Chéri-Bibi simply.

"As well?"

"As well."

"That makes three of 'em," Hilaire ventured to observe.

"You know how to count in the grocery business!"

The tone in which this fearsome sentence was flung in Hilaire's face
sent a shudder through him from head to foot.

Chéri-Bibi rose from the table, paid the bill and whistled to the
Dodger like a master calling his dog. Hilaire gave a start and followed
him like a puppy who has received a drubbing.

"I've known you when you had more go in you, Dodger," said Chéri-Bibi
when they were in the street.

"Well, curse me, three! You know, Monsieur le Marquis, that I've got out
of the habit of doing these things. I've got a bit rusty in the Rue
Saint Roch. Give me a little time to get used to the idea that we've got
a little job under way."

"Look here, Dodger, I'm very fond of you, but don't go on pulling such a
long face at the thought of doing a service to a brave soldier--a
thought which ought to move you to enthusiasm. Bear in mind that without
our assistance he'll fall a victim to those villains."

"Villains! You're right, Monsieur le Marq . . . I feel my enthusiasm
beginning to rise."

"They're the cleverest of blackmailers."

"The mere thought of blackmailers always disgusted me," declared
Hilaire, with a gesture of repugnance.

"Well done! That's more like your old self. Don't forget that we have to
do our good deeds in the dark."

"Yes, yes; I shan't forget. We must work in the dark as far as possible.
Certainly we shan't receive a medal for striking this particular blow."

"No, but you will satisfy your own conscience."

"That's good enough for me, Monsieur le Marquis. You have helped me to
make up my mind to act," declared Hilaire in a voice which was not
entirely cheerful.

"Well, now that you've come round to a sensible view of things, I'll
finish telling you the program."

"What's that? Isn't that the end of it?"

"Nearly the end."

"Nearly!" exclaimed Hilaire with a profound sigh.

"Well, what about it? What's the matter now?"

"It's this 'nearly.' You said 'nearly,' Monsieur Casimir. Now I confess
that this 'nearly' scares me. In the old days when you, Monsieur le
Marquis . . . had 'nearly' finished a job we had enough in hand to last
a week!"

"What a pity. And all this fuss over a peddler of rugs," growled
Chéri-Bibi.

"A peddler of rugs?"

"Yes, a man from Tunis whom they call the Caid, and who lugs about on
his shoulder all day a bundle of rugs--a nigger of no importance."

"Oh, if that's all it is!" exclaimed Hilaire. "I fancy I see him
now--one of those 'me never ill and never die' sort."

"Let him say it," snorted Chéri-Bibi fiercely.

"What do you mean, 'let him say it?'"

"Hang it all, if he says 'me never ill, never die,' he's making a
mistake, that's all."

"Oh, very good indeed. You, Monsieur le Marq . . . always had a pretty
wit. And afterwards? Aren't there any more?"

"No, I don't think I've forgotten anybody. Besides, once for all, call
me Monsieur Casimir."

"Of course . . . of course, Monsieur Casimir."

Hilaire did not utter another word. Monsieur Casimir respected his
silence; and thus they came to within a few steps of the hotel.

"Can I leave you and go to bed?" asked Hilaire in a voice that failed
him somewhat. "We're not going to begin to-night?"

"No. Go and have a good night's rest, and, above all, no bad dreams."

"Good night, Monsieur Casimir."

"Good night, Monsieur Hilaire."




CHAPTER XVII

H. DE SAYNTHINE


Hilaire had been in the service of his new master for several days. So
far, he was extremely satisfied with his new and singular position. His
pay was by no means small. When he first called on M. de Saynthine he
was subjected to a searching scrutiny, and his master said: "He looks an
ass, but he must be pretty quick-witted."

Such criticism was hardly likely to meet with Hilaire's approval, but he
was consoled by the first part of the sentence, and he said to himself:

"I look what I wish to look at the moment."

After closing the door of the study in which he interviewed him, M. de
Saynthine, who was a well set-up, middle-aged man, went on arranging his
tie before the glass, which enabled him to watch Hilaire's every
movement.

"You were recommended to me, my lad," he said, "by a friend of Mlle.
Nina Noha, who told me that you have a very reliable character" (M.
Hilaire bowed), "and are so discreet that you would even decline to tell
me the extent of your zeal in your late master's interests. I understood
that you rendered him very substantial services, which were only
interrupted by the unexpected outbreak of war. That suits me admirably.
I am told, also, that you are not the sort of man to work for nothing,
and your devotion doesn't run counter to your interests. I will give you
a thousand francs a month. Will that satisfy you?"

"That will suit me to begin with," returned Hilaire, without moving a
muscle.

"Then we are agreed," concluded M. de Saynthine. "But it is understood
that you do absolutely as you're told without asking questions, or
endeavoring to understand what is not explained to you; and you will
pretend not to understand when you do understand. Moreover, you must not
be surprised at anything."

"Monsieur, that's settled. It's just the sort of place that I've been
looking for."

"Well, go and see M. Onésime Belon, who will tell you what you have to
do from day to day. He is the man with whom you will have to deal when
it's a question of any special business. You must take your orders from
him as though he were myself. . . ."

Hilaire was also extremely satisfied with M. Onésime Belon. Taken all
round, the situation was an easy one.

Hilaire had sharp ears and an inquiring eye. When he had a moment to
spare he went to report the result of his observations to the
hall-porter at Dr. Ross's, for the Boulevard Victor Hugo, in which the
dentist lived, was not far away.

Dr. Ross never received patients after five o'clock in the afternoon.
Thus, at that hour the hall-porter would close his office. He was a
queer porter, for, in order not to be disturbed by the night bell, he
rented and slept in a small house at St. Jean, on the sea coast, not far
from Cape Ferrat.

Now and then the Dodger found time to go with him, even to this distant
neighborhood.

One night, as they were passing near Mont Boron, they met a certain
peddler of rugs, who must have said some very unpleasant things to them,
for a more or less violent quarrel ensued. The Dodger was very excited
about it when he left his friend a quarter of an hour later at the
cross-way on the road from Villefranche.

"That's one point scored," he said with a deep sigh.

"Oh, that man doesn't count," returned Chéri-Bibi in his gruff voice.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE NUT ON THE RACK


But we must return to M. de Saynthine. That evening when he left M.
Onésime Belon, with whom he had a long discussion, he passed through
the little door leading to the deserted street on the seafront, and
turned his steps towards the light of the town. He walked past the pier,
crossed the public gardens, stopped before Violette's shop and
exclaimed: "Hullo, Giselle is working late to-night!"

M. de Saynthine was in love. In reality M. de Saynthine was always in
love, on principle. He possessed the sentimental temperament of a
certain Arigonde, alias the Parisian, who, in his youth, had achieved
notoriety as a squire of dames.

We know that this notoriety had landed him in the Assize Court, and even
beyond that Court, as a result of irretrievable accidents which had
befallen the ladies to whom he paid court. The few years that he had
spent in the convict settlement had by no means extinguished his ardor.

In the early days this lady-killer was prodigal of his favors and not
very particular in the choice of his partners. But he had become tired
of so many commonplace adventures and victories won, as it were, before
a shot was fired, that he felt the longing for an affair which would be
more difficult to complete, more serious and more lasting. He had
encountered Giselle at Violette's shop in Paris, for Nina Noha was one
of its customers.

Nina Noha, to serve her own purposes, which may be
imagined--particularly if it is remembered that she was of Hungarian
descent and quite recently naturalized--never lost an opportunity of
introducing M. de Saynthine into society circles as an old friend, who
was interested in stock breeding in the Argentine, and who had come to
France on the declaration of war to discover the most effective means of
serving his country.

The truth--unfortunately only too obvious--was that enemy propaganda,
which was always on the lookout to increase its army of spies in the old
as well as the new world, had its ramifications even in the
gold-diggings in Guiana, and had enlisted the Parisian and his gang at a
moment, when, having escaped a second time from their prison, they
reached, in utter destitution, the frontier of Dutch Guiana.

Enemy agents had at once seen how to turn those miscreants to account,
and had supplied them with the necessary social status to enable them to
live in France.

Nina Noha had to take the Parisian in hand, and when she was entrusted
with the mission of organizing a system of espionage among the
fashionable crowd on the Riviera, she brought the Parisian with her, and
his gang followed.

The Parisian's first intention had been to make love to the dancer, but
she repressed him so remorselessly that he accepted his rejection
without demur.

"We are not here to amuse ourselves," she flung at him.

The consciousness that he was her subordinate was extremely distasteful
to M. de Saynthine. Until he had succeeded in striking the blow which he
was meditating against the Nut, he sought, therefore, to pass the time
and console himself for Nina Noha's contempt by engaging in one of those
little sentimental intrigues in which he was a past master. Giselle's
handsome face, with its touch of sadness, appealed to him from the
first--from the day on which he saw her when he accompanied Nina Noha on
one of her visits to Violette's.

While he was at Nice he happened to pass Violette's shop and he caught
sight of the young girl. After that he endeavored, without success, to
induce her to respond to his advances, and he was delighted with her.
Some degree of opposition was by no means unwelcome to him.

That evening again his footsteps led him quite naturally to Violette's
shop. And now he was watching Giselle, not without excitement, putting
things back in their proper places before her departure. He knew that
she lived in the Rue d'Angleterre, for he had followed her so far, and
he determined to make the same little trip that evening.

Accordingly it was with a feeling of great annoyance that, when the shop
door suddenly opened, he saw standing before him Nina Noha and her maid.

"What are you doing here, de Saynthine? I say, come along with me to my
place. I want to talk to you."

"But, my dear lady, I happen to have an appointment----"

"Tut, tut! You're waiting for Giselle, aren't you? Oh, you wonder how I
know what you're up to! Giselle made a complaint to the elder
Mademoiselle Violette, and she told me all about it But your love
affairs are no business of mine. Come with me. Someone is waiting to
have a chat with you."

He could not choose but obey. He was incensed. He thought that he might
even yet be able to meet Giselle before she reached the Rue
d'Angleterre.

When they were in Nina Noha's flat, she opened a door which, till then,
de Saynthine thought was permanently closed. The door connected her flat
with the adjoining flat. She went into it and he heard her say:

"Yes, my dress will be ready to-morrow evening."

And a voice, which he did not at once recognize, asked:

"Do you know whether the d'Haumonts will be at Madame d'Erlande's?"

"Yes, they'll be there. I heard so from Mdlle. Violette, who saw Madame
d'Haumont to-day."

A few words were exchanged in a whisper, and Nina Noha returned and
requested M. de Saynthine to go into the next flat. He saw a man with a
pallid face and feverish eyes lying on a sofa.

"Oh, Monsieur le Comte!" he exclaimed.

"Yes, it's I, come back to life again, or nearly so. I've had a narrow
escape. That Captain d'Haumont shoots like a duffer, but we shall be
even with him, don't you think, de Saynthine?"

"Yes, Monsieur le Comte."

"But who is the man? No d'Haumont has lived in France for the last fifty
years. Here's a man who came back from away in Guiana with millions. It
seems that he has a splendid business out there in the forest. All the
same, you can't keep a business like that secret. I have had inquiries
made. Who is d'Haumont? He is quite unknown in Guiana. Have you fellows
in your wanderings through the country ever heard of d'Haumont's
business?"

"No, certainly not. His business must be on the Upper Oyapok, and even
farther away. It's a very uncivilized place. People never go there. But
in those parts one stroke of luck is enough to make a man rich."

"It's very funny," interposed Nina Noha. "I saw Captain d'Haumont for
the first time at the fête at Valrose, and I had a sort of feeling that
his face was not unfamiliar to me."

"Oh, one often imagines such things," returned de Saynthine, shaking his
head.

"Listen to me, de Saynthine," went on de Gorbio. "I have had the closest
inquiries made about Captain d'Haumont. There is a gap in his life! We
must know what that gap means, my lad."

De Saynthine bowed.

"I will have a good try, Monsieur le Comte." Having said which, he took
his leave.

So they had sent for him in order to talk about d'Haumont! "You don't
catch me parting with that tit-bit to you," he growled, thinking of his
own schemes.

As he walked past Violette's shop his thoughts turned once again to
Giselle with a rancor which but immensely increased his longing to see
the handsome mannequin. But she was no longer there.

As a matter of fact, while he was submitting to the caprice of Nina
Noha, Giselle had been hastily sent for. Her mother was in an alarming
state, and the poor girl had set out distraught. A few minutes later
Captain and Madame d'Haumont came to the shop. Mdlle. Violette told them
of the blow which was threatening her assistant, and Didier at once
suggested that they should go and call on her. Somewhat surprised to see
her husband display so much anxiety, Françoise none the less expressed
her agreement with him; and Mdlle. Violette herself went with them to
the Rue d'Angleterre.

Five minutes later they knocked at the door of a small flat on the fifth
floor. A nurse asked them in, and they found themselves in a sort of
entrance-lobby which contained a folding bedstead. It was here that
Giselle slept.

Mlle. Violette had already slipped into the next room to see the mother,
who appeared to be a little better. She had had a fit, but, according to
the nurse, the doctor had given them a few words of hope. Mdlle.
Violette came back to say that they could see the invalid.

They entered a room which was quite tastefully furnished, and Giselle's
mother welcomed them with a smile on her pale face. She expressed her
gratitude to Didier for what he had done for her daughter and her self
in words which brought tears to Françoise's eyes. And she said a few
nice things about Françoise and her marriage which stirred the latter
to the depths of her being.

"But where is Giselle?" asked Didier.

"She went downstairs with the doctor. She probably wanted to go with him
to learn the truth, the poor child. She fears that I am really ill,
though we have done everything we can to hide the truth from her."

Françoise and Mlle. Violette assured her that the southern sun would do
wonders for her, but that she must not live in rooms where its light
never penetrated; and they made arrangements for Madame Anthenay, for
such was the mother's name, to take up her abode in a small but
comfortable flat on the Quay du Midi where she would be bathed in
sunshine from the rising to the setting of the sun.

Suddenly they heard loud knocks on the landing door; and when it was
opened Giselle flung herself into the room, her face convulsed and her
frame shaken with a fit of sobbing.

"What's happened? . . . What's the matter?"

She endeavored to restrain herself, asking pardon of those whom she had
not expected to see for giving way to such a silly exhibition of
emotion.

"It's nothing. I've had a great fright in the street."

"That's not true," exclaimed Mlle. Violette. "I bet it's that man again.
He has been following you."

"Well, yes, it is he. He has insulted me. He won't leave me alone."

Didier sprang from his chair, pale, and with a terrible lode on his face
that frightened Françoise.

"Who has insulted you?" he demanded in a smothered voice.

Mlle. Violette went to the window of the balcony on the roof which
looked out on to the street. And she pointed to a man wearing a soft hat
and an overcoat with the collar turned up, walking with his hands in his
pockets, his stick under his arm.

"Yes, that's the man!" she cried. "The wretch follows Giselle every day.
We shall have to lodge a complaint."

Declining to listen to his wife, who, greatly distressed, begged him to
stay where he was, Didier rushed wildly out of the room.

* * * * *

In truth, in our ordinary, prosaic life men of nobility of mind and
goodness of heart are ever eager to throw themselves into the cause of
virtue. We may say of these men that they are true knights, for they
never lose an opportunity of flying to the rescue of beauty in distress,
untouched by any selfish motive or even by the least thought of reward.
Such a man was Captain d'Haumont.

He had already "done enough" for Giselle by helping her to escape from
poverty and enter a good business; and he was entitled to consider that
any claim upon his charitable instincts had been fully met. He might
have rested content with that. Giselle was old enough to protect herself
from the annoyance of a chance wayfarer or even from the deep-laid plots
of a rascal.

Indifference or contempt on the one hand and a feeling of weariness and
wounded pride on the other are enough, as a general rule, to cool the
first ardor of a villain who, in his self-complacency, thinks that no
one is able to resist him.

Captain d'Haumont bounded wildly down the stairs, darted into the
street, and looked about for his man, or rather Giselle's man, with the
gestures of a bulldog longing for a bite, and it might almost seem as if
he had taken leave of his senses.

What was Françoise to think about it? She might very well say to
herself: "Well, if he gets into such a state of excitement over a
stranger to whom someone has been lacking in respect, what will he do
when any man looks at me askance? Good gracious, he couldn't possibly
show more righteous indignation!" She became quite dejected by the
reflection. But as she was, in her own way, inspired with sentiments
which did not fall short in generosity those entertained by Captain
d'Haumont, whom she loved more for himself than for herself--which is
the crowning test of love--she quickly discarded thoughts which she
regarded as selfish, and her sole apprehension was as to what lay in
store, in this attack, for the man for whom she would have given her
life.

Mlle. Giselle was no less anxious as to what might happen to her
protector, and she expressed aloud her regret for not keeping silent;
but she was not aware that Captain d'Haumont was in the room; and, in
particular, she had no idea that he would take the matter so much to
heart. Her agitation, her apologies, her sorrow, were so sincere and
expressed with such real candor that though Françoise might have felt
within her as a result of her husband's action--charitable, doubtless,
but of an exaggerated charity--a natural antipathy to Giselle, she was
the first to console her.

They both went downstairs to seek for news, in the same state of
agitation and with sinking hearts. Upstairs, Madame Anthenay was almost
fainting. Mdlle. Violette was the only person who retained any degree of
self-command.

"What do you expect to happen? Captain d'Haumont will give the
unmannerly brute a piece of his mind and the fellow will make off. You
may be certain that we shan't see that 'follower' again."

As a matter of fact, at the sight of the Captain waving his stick like a
madman, the man buried his face still deeper in the collar of his
overcoat, and led away along a street branching off at an angle, and
turned his hastening footsteps towards the light of one of the main
roads.

Captain d'Haumont soon came up to him, but the night was dark.

"Don't walk so fast, Monsieur," Captain d'Haumont threw at him. "I've
something to say to you."

At the sound of that voice the man gave a start but did not slacken his
pace.

"Wait a moment, if you don't mind," went on d'Haumont. "I want to tell
you that you are a coward, and if you don't stop tormenting that girl
you'll have me to deal with."

But the other made no attempt to halt. Far from it. He strode forward
with redoubled speed.

"Do you hear?" pursued the mad Didier. "If I catch you following Mlle.
Anthenay again I shall punch your head. Besides, you are not going to
get away until I've seen your face."

And as they came under the light of a street lamp, Captain d'Haumont
raised his walking stick and knocked the man's soft hat on to the
pavement, uncovering the upper part of his face.

At that moment d'Haumont ceased to wave his arms, and uttered a hollow
groan as though he had received a blow in the stomach. The man on the
other hand did not utter a word. He picked up his hat, rammed it on his
head, and went on his way.

"The Parisian!" cried Captain d'Haumont in a choking voice. "The
Parisian!"

And he retraced his steps staggering like a drunken man.




CHAPTER XIX

A BAD NIGHT FOLLOWED BY BAD DAYS


Didier met the two women at the corner of the street almost frightened
out of their senses. He calmed them in a faltering voice. The man, he
said, had rushed away as soon as he caught sight of him. The d'Haumonts
at once took leave of Giselle, who implored them to forgive her foolish
outburst.

In the taxi in which they drove back to Cape Ferrat, Didier and
Françoise exchanged but an occasional remark. She was in a state of
depression. She thought that her husband would be annoyed with her for
her remarks regarding his exaggerated kindness to Giselle.

She took his hand in hers, and was no little surprised and even alarmed
to feel that it was icy cold.

"Oh, good gracious, how cold you are! Aren't you well, dear?"

"Yes, yes, I am quite well, I assure you."

She put her hand to his forehead and found that it was covered with an
icy perspiration. She was startled.

"Something must be the matter with you. Do say something. Why don't you
talk? I've never seen you like this before."

He endeavored to make a jest of it, but his voice was quite different
from his usual voice. She began to weep.

"I don't know what has happened. I don't know what is the matter with
you. You are concealing something from me."

He took her in his arms and kissed her in a sudden outburst of passion
which was far from reassuring her.

"Heavens, you are crying too," she said.

"Only because you are grieved. You must know I worship you."

"Yes, yes. Tell me so! Say it again!"

"Can you doubt it, dearest?"

"I should die if I doubted it. But all the same, tell me that you love
me. I like it. Take me in your arms again and kiss me . . . kiss me. Let
us mingle our tears. It's so good."

"What nonsense we talk! We don't know why we are crying. We are behaving
like children. It's a shame."

"So, my love, it's true. You are not hiding anything from me. You didn't
face that wretched man?"

"No, I scarcely saw him. He literally took to his heels. I advised him
not to show himself in this quarter again, that's all. We'll say no more
about it."

"Don't let's speak of him."

They dropped the subject, and indeed the rest of the drive to the villa
was passed in silence. Then, when they were in the house, she said:

"Listen, dear, you must let me take care of you. A moment ago you were
as cold as ice, and now your hands are burning. You are still suffering
from fever. It's only a short time since you recovered from your wounds,
and we are behaving very unwisely. You must have caught a cold on
leaving Madame d'Erlande's. . . . But what are you doing? Leave the
doors. The servants will dose them."

He was surprised to see himself locking the doors like a child who is
overcome with fear.

And yet he had become slightly more composed. He longed to remain in
doubt. He tried to doubt still. Might he not have made a mistake, for
after all the vision of that man's face under the light of the street
lamp was but a momentary one. It was not even a face. A forehead, a pair
of eyes, that was all. Was that enough to convince him that he had
encountered the Parisian? Surely not. He had to reckon with freaks of
resemblance, as well as his own state of mind, ever ready to conjure up
dangers and to imagine that they were near.

The Parisian at Nice! No, it was out of the question. The man had been
captured and taken back to prison. The newspapers contained a report of
the occurrence. And, besides, if the Parisian were at Nice would he not
have been occupied in hunting different game from Giselle? Captain
d'Haumont would have heard something about him.

Thus his thoughts ran on. Françoise's love, the anxious attentions with
which she enveloped him, while they touched his heart also relaxed the
tension of his nerves. They were perfectly happy and tranquil; a great
peace fell upon them. And he could no longer believe that anything
untoward would befall him. He kept quite quiet, took his medicine,
allowed himself to be nursed, and--worn out by the new excitement which
physically and mentally weighed down upon him--fell asleep.

But Françoise did not fall asleep.

She listened to his irregular breathing; she watched the painful slumber
in which the man beside her lay. Resting on her elbow, she bent over the
beloved face, distorted by strange dreams, with an ever-increasing
anguish which wrung her heart and almost stifled her.

What frightful visions were passing before those closed eyes and the
heaving chest? She had never watched her husband asleep. The sight was
terrifying.

And then his face changed so that she did not recognize it, and she was
appalled. Deep furrows, which she had never seen before, plowed his
forehead and temples and the corners of his mouth. The face which, when
it was in repose, was calm and dignified and kept under control by a
strong, brave mind, was distorted as if the spirit of fear had taken
possession of it at a moment when the sentinel was no longer on guard.

It was impossible for her to remain any further beside that tortured
face which was unknown to her, and she wakened Didier so as to see once
more the face as she knew it--the face of the man she had married.

Didier uttered a hollow groan and opened his haggard eyes. By the light
of the night-lamp she watched him come to himself from his nightmare
like a swimmer who rises to the surface of the waters and is able at
last to breathe again.

"Didier . . . Didier . . . What's the matter? Don't you recognize me?
It's I . . . Françoise."

Then his face unbent and his eyes were filled once more with the soft
light which illumined them whenever his gaze fell upon her.

"I've had such an awful dream, dearest."

"Yes, it was awful. That's why I woke you up."

"What did I say? What was I talking about?"

"You said nothing, but you were suffering and sighing and groaning
terribly."

Françoise's gentle voice seemed to drive away for good and all the
cruel shadows of the night.

"But what were you dreaming about?" she asked. "I had the worst dream
that it is possible to conceive, dear. I dreamt that you had ceased to
love me."

"Oh, my Didier!"

She took him in her arms and he lay his head upon her breast

"Listen to my heart," she said.

They listened in silence. Didier did not speak again, and he pretended
to yield to a sweet and refreshing sleep. But he did not sleep. He would
not allow himself to sleep. He feared to be betrayed by his
dreams. . . .

She, too, closed her eyes and made believe to sleep, and he really
thought that she was asleep, but she knew that he was still awake.

They were deceiving each other for the first time in their married life.
Didier, like a sufferer who seeks a corner in which to lie down so as to
suffer less, laid down his secret there with her, and from that moment
she did not doubt that the secret was worthy of its refuge.

With a man of Didier's character--assuming that there was a secret which
made him suffer in his dreams as he lay beside the woman he loved--it
could only be some trouble which it was his duty to hide from her but
which, if she knew what it was, would not make her blush for him.

Ever since Didier's strange behavior at the beginning of what might be
called their engagement, she fancied that there was something mysterious
in his past life. She persisted in thinking that it was a story of some
former woman--of some bad woman of course--who had taken advantage of
Didier's goodness, and even now was trying to hold him up to ransom.
Whether this was the explanation or not, she felt convinced that Didier
was the victim.

At an early hour next morning Captain d'Haumont was in Nice. He waited
to see Giselle at the corner of the Rue d'Angleterre and the Rue Bardin,
pacing up and down outside a fashionable hairdressing and massage
establishment. The sound of his footsteps coming and going put the
porter in a general flutter.

Didier knew that Giselle had to be at the shop at nine o'clock and
passed that way; and as he had no wish, in view of the incident of the
evening before, for Mlle. Violette to know anything about the step he
was taking, he waited for her in the street To call at her own place at
that hour would have been difficult to explain. At the same time he
hoped that, impelled by some necessity of house-keeping, Giselle would
make a very early appearance in the quarter.

As the minutes went by his impatience became painful to see. The porter
at the establishment felt sorry for him; and he stopped some of the
customers as they came in to point to the man on the pavement.

"Someone has made an appointment and failed to turn up!"

At a quarter to nine a lady who was in the habit of visiting the shop
every day for her "high frequency" treatment, with the object,
apparently, of renewing her youth in so far as it was possible, alighted
from her car, and at the moment when she was about to enter the
vestibule stopped with a face like stone.

Her eyes had fallen upon Captain d'Haumont running up to Giselle and
entering into an animated talk with her.

"Well, Madame d'Erlande, the girl has turned up, and not a moment too
soon," said the porter. "Just fancy, the poor man has been cooling his
heels on the pavement for more than an hour."

"You don't mean to say so!"

"I assure you that he was here at half-past seven. He must be gone on
her."

Madame d'Erlande was incensed.

"The wretch," she exclaimed. "And I treated the whole thing as a joke.
Poor Françoise!"

Meantime Captain d'Haumont had received certain details regarding the
man who was pursuing Giselle which were to some extent reassuring.
Giselle was greatly astonished to meet the Captain on her way to the
shop, and as soon as she learned what had brought him, she straightway
assumed that a somewhat violent scene had occurred between the two men
the evening before and that the Captain intended to follow it up with a
challenge to a duel.

Taking alarm at the prospect, she implored him to overlook the incident,
but he expressed himself in such strong language in order to obtain from
her the real truth, that in the end she told him the little that she
knew about the stranger; that is to say, that he was a friend of one of
Mlle. Violette's customers; that the first time she saw him was in Paris
where, it seemed, he was well known in artistic and society circles;
that he offered to get her on the stage, explaining that he had
considerable influence in the theater; and that his name was de
Saynthine.

When he left Giselle, d'Haumont said to himself: "I lost my head. I've
been dreaming."

An hour later--after thinking things over--nothing remained of what he
called his fancy of the evening before, but he made up his mind to
escape from the scene and surroundings which prevented him from enjoying
as he might, in the soft light of his honeymoon, the last precious hours
of his sick leave; and he would take Françoise for a little trip in
which he hoped he might encounter neither the form of Nina Noha nor the
shade of the Parisian.

He attributed the confusion into which, for the time being, he was
thrown to the reappearance of the dancer on his horizon. From that
moment his dearest wish was to leave the place in which she was to be
met. Obsessed by this thought he turned his steps towards the building
at which, during the war, safe-conducts and passports were issued. Thus
he passed through a part of the old town, taking a short cut. In that
quarter the streets are narrow and winding. He found himself stopping
outside a low-storied shop containing secondhand clothes and cheap
carpets, the signboard of which bore the name "Monsieur Toulouse."

How was it that his attention was attracted by this signboard? Why did
he remember the name? Later on when he asked himself these questions, he
was unable to offer any explanation, except that in the subconscious
depths within him, some mysterious faculty knew that the signboard would
be mixed up in his life.

A hand-cart laden with vegetables was being moved, thus clearing the
street. When the cart was dragged away, a sort of human specter was
revealed to view, which shot past the walls and entered a dark passage
adjoining Monsieur Toulouse's shop. Didier leaned for support against
the wall. He had recognized the Burglar!

He summoned up sufficient strength of mind to slip away from the place.
His entire being cried aloud: Fly . . . escape with Françoise to the
uttermost comers of the earth!

His face was ghastly white when he entered the room in which passes were
made out. He was almost sure that the Burglar had not caught sight of
him. He waited a moment in order to recover his breath and the use of
his voice.

When he went up to the main table at which were seated the clerics whose
duty it was to answer inquiries from the public, he saw a man standing
before him, holding a number of papers in his hand--a man wearing a
long, flowing overcoat who stared him steadily in the face. Didier felt
giddy. His mind was giving way.

He never knew how he managed to get outside, or how he found the
strength to throw himself into a taxi and to give his address. He had
recognized the Joker!




CHAPTER XX

A SIGHT OF THE ABYSS


When Didier was in his own home again he saw that Françoise was in a
state of great uneasiness.

"Why did you leave the house so early without letting me know?"

"You were asleep and I didn't want to disturb you."

"How pale you are! You are still suffering. You are concealing something
from me, Didier. You have received bad news."

"No, dearest, I assure you----"

The servant came into the room with a letter addressed to him. He took
it from her, and went and shut himself in the study, stating that he
must get rid of his correspondence which was in arrears. Obviously he
wanted to be alone. Françoise realized it, and was greatly distressed.

As soon as he was in the study, he placed his head in his hands and
endeavored to think. His mind was a blank. The shock had been too much
for him. He was stunned by it.

He stared at the letter on the table before him without opening it. It
bore the Nice postmark. Suddenly he caught hold of it and feverishly,
with shaking hands, tore it open. It was not until he had made several
attempts that he could read it:


_My Dear Captain_,

_I am of opinion that it is absolutely necessary for us to have an
interview. You need not be uneasy, for I do not bear you any ill-will on
account of our recent meeting. As soon as you recognized me you did the
proper thing. I might have entered into conversation with you there and
then, but a discussion in the street, even at ten o'clock at night, is
never very safe, and it is desirable that what we have to say to you
should, as far as possible, be said among ourselves. My friends are
here. I do not hide from you that they also will be delighted to see you
again. It is at the shop of one of them, Monsieur Toulouse, secondhand
clothes dealer, at the corner of the Rue Basse, in the old town, that I
make an appointment with you for five o'clock to-day. We shall wait for
you until six o'clock, and if you do not put in an appearance, we shall
be entitled to presume that our letter has gone astray, and we shall
write to Madame d'Haumont, taking the necessary precautions to insure,
this time, that our letter reaches its destination._


The letter was signed "The Parisian."

Strange to say the letter came as a relief to Didier. He would meet the
danger face to face. He would know exactly what to fear and what to
hope; whether he was to live and for how long.

He gave no thought of the danger to which he might be exposed by keeping
the appointment. Either his enemies and himself would "come to an
understanding," or they would murder him, and in any event they would be
rendering him a service.

When he had mapped out his plan of campaign, he felt sufficiently
himself for the time being to deceive Françoise by word and manner and
look.

He went to her and told her that he felt much better: he had been
suffering since the previous night from an attack of malarial fever
which he thought he had long since shaken off. He first caught it during
one of his visits, many years before, to a marshy district in the
tropics. His words in no way allayed his wife's misgivings.

In the afternoon she stole through the passage to the room which Didier
used as a study. It possessed a glazed door, the curtain of which was
not properly drawn. And she saw Didier with his eyes fixed on an
envelope which she recognized, by the seal on it, as one which she had
seen in his hands on the night before his duel with Count de Gorbio. His
head was slightly turned towards her, and there was a look of infinite
sadness on his face such as she had never seen before.

It was not for his own fate that the unhappy man was moved to pity, but
for her fate--the fate which he had brought on her in a moment of
lover's cowardice. He called himself a villain and held himself in
horror. He would have to die. He would have to rescue her from the shame
of her marriage with him. Yes, he would keep the appointment.

At that moment he raised his head, and he seemed to hear a mysterious
voice which said in a low whisper: "Don't go!"

The window which looked out on to the grounds was open. He thought he
saw a dark form holding on to the window. He half rose to his feet, his
heart beating like the clapper of a bell.

"Chéri-Bibi!"

Was it a dream? He found the strength to stand up; and he moved closer
to the window with arms outstretched to the dark form. And he heard once
more:

"Don't go!" And the dark form leaped into the room.

Françoise, hidden behind the curtain, watched, affrighted, the
incomprehensible spectacle of that hideous human monstrosity, the sight
of which alone would have made little children fly in terror, clasped in
her husband's arms.

What was the meaning of that embrace? By what unfathomable mystery did
Didier, her husband, her hero, hold to his heart this formidable brute
who came to visit him by the path peculiar to robbers and murderers?

A last flicker of light caused the bandit's face to loom into sight so
dramatically that Françoise opened her mouth to cry aloud in horror,
but her very horror stifled the cry, and she fell her length on the
floor.

She did not lose consciousness. In the next room a muffled whisper bore
witness that the conversation was continuing between the two friends.
But she could not hear what was said. In her ears rang a buzzing sound,
which seemed to be a messenger of madness.

She managed to drag herself to her room and to stretch herself on the
bed.

Chéri-Bibi, in the study, cut short Didier's desire for an explanation
of how he came to be there. It was not a question of explaining his
presence, but of knowing what the Nut was going to do in view of the
danger which threatened him. Here the bandit found himself up against a
rock.

Nothing that he could say to dissuade the Nut from keeping the
appointment which the Parisian had made in so barefaced a manner altered
his resolution. He would not swerve from his opinion that he must try a
policy of conciliation, and the prospect which was guilelessly opened up
to him by Chéri-Bibi, who proposed to get rid at the earliest
moment--that very evening if necessary--of the miscreants who were
threatening him, was not one likely to make him change his mind.
Notwithstanding his ten years in a penal settlement, it was difficult
for him to treat seriously an idea, put forward so definitely, for the
suppression of these human obstacles. Thus he was not content to implore
his old comrade from the inferno to refrain from any intervention in the
formidable business, he put it to him as a peremptory command.

At the outset he had welcomed the almost natural appearance of
Chéri-Bibi as an unexpected help which Providence had vouchsafed him in
the hour of adversity, but after a few minutes' talk the artlessness of
his friend's project struck him with dismay, and led him almost to
regret that, in circumstances in which all might yet perhaps be saved by
the display of tact and resource, he should meet again a protector of
such savage zeal that human life seemed to mean little or nothing to
him.

Seeing him in such a pitiful frame of mind, Chéri-Bibi expressed his
shame of what he called his lack of pluck, and, somewhat vexed, no
longer concealed from him that he had already taken it upon himself to
remove the commonest of his enemies from his path.

"Whom do you mean?" asked Didier in a voice strained with anxiety.

"The Caid. The man whose dead body was found at Mont Boron. It made
quite a stir. I did it," returned Chéri-Bibi frankly.

Didier shuddered, refusing, however, to believe his own ears.

"But my wife and I were at Mont Boron that evening, and not far from the
very spot."

"Exactly. His presence prevented you from kissing each other."

"And you killed him!"

"Don't take on like that. You had nothing to do with it. It was his own
fault. Pull yourself together. He had no right to creep over the
parapet. He was already mangled and disfigured, I assure you, when I
finished him off to prevent him from molesting you."

"It's awful!"

"Not a bit of it. There's no need to exaggerate. And then, you know, he
wasn't there for any good purpose."

"Oh, Chéri-Bibi! . . . Chéri-Bibi, your friendship is a fearful
thing."

"Is it really! . . . Yes, my friendship is a fearful thing, but not for
you, I hope. You will never know all that I have done to make your life
a success, and for your happiness."

"Yes, I do know. I owe everything to you."

"I won't deny it. That's why, since I am responsible for your happiness,
I won't allow anyone to lay hands upon it."

Then, in language which bore witness to a certain acquaintance with the
polite world, the convict spoke to him with an almost lyrical
sensibility of the wedding ceremony, at which he had been present, at a
distance so as not to be recognized, but sufficiently near to keep an
eye on those miscreants and thwart their schemes.

When Didier learned from Chéri-Bibi that he had again escaped from
prison on the heels of the Parisian and his gang, and hastened after
them to Europe solely to keep them under observation and prevent them
from meeting him; when he learned that Chéri-Bibi had brought with him
Yoyo transformed into a dental-surgeon; when he was told of the part
played by M. Hilaire, to whom he already owed a great deal, in mounting
guard during many days over him and his honeymoon; and when he learned
that the fisherman who one evening took him and his wife for a row in
his boat was no other than Chéri-Bibi--Chéri-Bibi, his guardian angel,
his tutelary saint, who was always on the alert, now acting secretly and
now crushing everything before him--Didier was at a loss to express his
surprise and gratitude as well as his consternation at the evidence of
so many dangers from which he had escaped at a time when he believed
that they had been dispelled for ever.

He clasped the bandit's hand in his own trembling hand, and his emotion
arose as much from a feeling of gratitude as from the discovery that
when he believed that his bark had put off for Cythera he had been
sailing over the abyss.

"You would never have known anything about all this if those swine had
given me another couple of days," ended Chéri-Bibi with a profound
sigh.

Captain d'Haumont grasped the significance of those words. He quivered
all over. A nice conversation! And such a meeting!

To have on the one hand Françoise, who lived but for his love, and on
the other Chéri-Bibi, who had escaped from the devil!

But the latter had not come to receive the Nut's thanks and speeches.
The moment that he was certain that he would never manage to convince
him, he quickly disappeared. He departed as he came, by the window, over
the roofs, and through the great, heavy, sweeping clouds in which his
huge form seemed to swell.




CHAPTER XXI

THE SEQUEL TO M. HILAIRE'S HOLIDAY


That afternoon M. Hilaire was driving a large motor-car with the hood
up, and few persons would have thought that he was not the owner of the
splendid equipage. Obviously there was nothing about him to suggest the
servant.

For that matter, M. Hilaire never looked like a servant, even in the
days when he was employed as one by a certain Marquis, who treated him
more as a confidential friend than as a secretary or valet.

M. Hilaire, on this particular day, had dressed himself with special
care as a man of fashion. A check suit, with gaiters, a gray felt hat,
and a blue butterfly bow with white spots, gave him an air of renewed
youth as well as a very gentlemanly appearance. He was even wearing a
flower in his buttonhole.

When he reached the railway station he pulled up and leaped from the car
with a delightfully easy bearing. He gave a tip which enabled him to
wait for the train from Paris on the platform from which the common herd
was excluded.

The train from Paris was late as usual. M. Hilaire lit a cigar, and
walked up and down with his hands behind his back. Whom was he waiting
for? We may be certain that if he had been expecting Virginie he would
not have put himself to so much expense in the matter of dress.

Notwithstanding that his visit, which he hoped would have been a
peaceful one, had been attended by unforeseen complications, Hilaire had
made up his mind to spend a few pleasant hours while he was on the
Riviera. The time has come, perhaps, to show him in a light which is not
an entirely favorable one. It is certain that Hilaire, who had been
brought up in an austere school in so far as morals were concerned, and
nurtured from his earliest childhood on the maxims of Chéri-Bibi, who
not only hated a dissolute life but also any failure in respect to
women--it is certain that M. Hilaire would have been incapable of
committing, in this particular, an equivocal action; and Mademoiselle
Zoé's ingenuousness was in little danger from him. For long he had
treated her as a mischievous chit, which indeed she was. He did not
stand on ceremony when he wanted to pass through her attic on his way
over the roofs to some nocturnal frolic of his own, which was
detrimental to no one, except perhaps Virginie; but for some time the
saucy young gypsy had greatly amused him. She amused him all the more as
Virginie wearied him all the more. Madame Hilaire abused the right which
a wife possesses to make herself disagreeable, and if M. Hilaire found
some amount of pleasure in the fantastic ideas and the humorous sallies
of Mademoiselle Zoé, the fault lay to a great extent in Virginie and
her bad temper. So much so, that M. Hilaire's heart, which was breaking
away more and more every day from Virginie, was drawing nearer and
nearer every day to Zoé, and he made no attempt to prevent it. So much
so, that it was not Virginie whom he was expecting from Paris, but
Mademoiselle Zoé herself. Unfortunately, as luck would have it, they
both arrived by the same train!

At first he saw but one of them, for the very good reason that they did
not travel together; and more particularly because Mademoiselle Zoé had
boldly treated herself to a first class ticket, and was unaware that her
dear mistress was behind her in a second class carriage.

While Hilaire had decked himself out for the occasion, Mademoiselle Zoé
had not allowed herself to be outdone by him. She was sporting a pink
frock, with hat to match, both of which achieved some success before she
arrived at Nice.

Though she threw herself into M. Hilaire's arms the moment she saw him,
it was not from over-forwardness nor lack of guilelessness, but because
her heart was brimming over with thankfulness to him for having found
her a situation as second lady's maid to the celebrated dancer, Nina
Noha, and in such a beautiful neighborhood. It is needless to say that
she had given Virginie "the chuck" with a glad heart.

All this was vouched for by hugs and kisses which made M. Hilaire and
several passengers laugh, for they could not tear themselves away from
the contemplation of the youthful traveler and her pink frock and hat.

It was at that splendid moment of triumph that a lady of opulent corsage
loomed into sight from no one knew where and, waving her arms as though
she were demented, set to work to break her umbrella alternately over
the back of Zoé and the back of Hilaire.

Hilaire did not wait to hear more. He saw at a glance whence the blows
came, and took himself off with an alacrity which passengers, who were
jostling each other as they left the station, considered devoid of
manners. He did not stop, however, until he was outside the station,
where, under cover of his car, he could await events. As a measure of
precaution he set the engine going.

To his amazement he did not have to wait long. Mademoiselle Zoé
appeared, surrounded by a delighted mob. She held in her hand a few
shreds of her hat, from which the feathers had departed, and her nose
was bleeding.

Hilaire did not at first show his face, but when she passed close to
him, searching on either side, obviously endeavoring to find him, and
when he had made sure that Virginie was still in the station, he stepped
forward quickly, flung her, rather than seated her, in the car, leaped
to his seat, and drove off in a great style amid the shouts and cheering
of an enthusiastic public.

They had not gone far outside the town when he turned round to ask Zoé,
through the lowered window, what she had done with his wife.

"I gave her a pretty good dressing down," returned the charming Zoé.
"We were both of us hauled off to the chief inspector's office. They
took down our names and addresses. As my papers were in order they let
me go, but as Madame had no papers at all they put her in the train
which was starting for Paris."

"How was it that she had no papers?"

"Because I pinched them before I left. Look, here they are!" exclaimed
softly the artful creature, opening her wrist-bag.

M. Hilaire betrayed such inordinate satisfaction and steered the car so
wildly, that Mademoiselle Zoé implored him not to afford Madame Hilaire
yet awhile the joy of becoming a widow. Thereupon M. Hilaire suggested
that Zoé should come and sit on the seat beside him, a proposal which
she straightway accepted.

"Madame certainly had an idea that I was leaving," said Zoé.

"Don't let's speak about her," returned M. Hilaire. "Let's hope that
she'll have a pleasant journey. Don't let's bother about her."

M. Hilaire still bore the mark of Madame Hilaire's umbrella on his left
cheek, and this injury, though it was ever so slight, did not incline
him to pity her troubles overmuch.

"You can be easy now, my dear Zoé. You will enter the service of
important people. The celebrated Dr. Ross is going to take you to the
not less celebrated Nina Noha, who will know how to protect you better
than I do, worse luck, from Madame Hilaire's unreasonable ways; and if,
by chance, she takes it into her head to return to this part, where she
is not wanted, those people will find means of getting rid of her for
us."

Having uttered these reassuring words, M. Hilaire and Mademoiselle Zoé
had nothing more to do but to admire the landscape. It was very
beautiful. They were driving along the sea front on the road from
Cannes.

The air was soft, though great clouds were beginning to rise in the sky,
driven by the west wind, which usually portended some degree of
atmospheric disturbance for the approaching night. But Hilaire and Zoé
were intent only upon the passing hour. Hilaire's heaven at that moment
was in his heart, so that the other heavens, with their gathering
clouds, scarcely interested him. With Zoé at his side he forgot
everything, even the order which his master, M. de Saynthine, had given
him to be at the corner of the Rue Basse, in the old town, at five
o'clock punctually with the car, with the hood up and the iron shutters.

An order like that was, of course, at once brought to the knowledge of
M. Casimir, and M. Casimir himself gave M. Hilaire to understand that he
must on no account fail to keep the appointment. M. Casimir, in fact,
added: "It's quite likely that I myself shall want a car. It's very good
of M. de Saynthine to lend me his!"

But these instructions, which at first aroused the Dodger's interest,
were, at that moment, no more than an unsubstantial trifle in a lover's
brain!

M. Hilaire's cheeks flushed under the look, at, once mischievous and
grateful, which the handsome Zoé threw at him. He was conscious that
she pressed closer to him, and his steering became slightly erratic.

"How well you drive, Monsieur Hilaire," she said. "You must teach me;
will you?"

"Why, of course; whenever you like--the car doesn't belong to me!"

"How funny you are. Monsieur Hilaire. One never gets bored with you.
Will you have a plum?"

"Do you mean to say you've brought some preserved fruit with you?"

"I filled my bag with them. Here, do you recognize your own plums? The
real, the identical fruit as sold at Hilaire's up-to-date grocery
stores. The old and the new world united!"

Mlle. Zoé opened her small valise and M. Hilaire saw that it contained
several paper bags, bearing his name and address, full of preserved
fruit. It was a delicate attention and softened M. Hilaire's heart
beyond measure, so that his eyes grew moist, and he could not refrain
from saying to his pretty companion:

"Look here, my dear Zoé, I must give you a kiss."

And they kissed each other as they devoured the fruit. At that juncture
they heard a great clatter on their right. It was the train to Paris,
steaming towards Marseilles, for at this spot the permanent way runs for
several miles along the sea front.

But the train as it plunged forward made less noise than a certain lady
of our acquaintance who was standing at the door of one of the carriages
and began literally to bellow. The fury of her invective rose above the
song of the wheels, and the frenzy of her gestures scared the man
guarding the line.

"Virginie. . . . It's Virginie!"

"Madame. . . . It's Madame!"

It was indeed Madame, and she was in a mighty temper.

It must be stated that the speed of the car was equal to that of the
train, so that for a while car and train traveled abreast, and the lady
at the carriage door did not miss a single iota of what was happening in
the car. She recognized M. Hilaire; She recognized Zoé. She recognized
the plums!

In her indignation she leaned so far out of the window that certainly
but for the intervention of kind-hearted persons in the carriage, who
clung to her skirts, a grievous accident might have been feared.

"Be careful, Virginie, you will get yourself run over," shouted M.
Hilaire, who, cherishing no ill-will against her, advised her to reserve
herself for a less violent end.

"Would you like a plum, Madame?" asked Mdlle. Zoé, holding out a bag on
which the poor lady could discern quite plainly the name and
superscription of the "up-to-date grocery stores."

"Ladies . . . Gentlemen . . . That's my husband. . . . My husband with
my shop-girl! . . . They're gallows-birds!"

This last imputation greatly ruffled M. Hilaire, who slackened his pace,
while Mdlle. Zoé rapped out as the train sped past them:

"Enjoy yourself, old dear!"

"Now we can go back to Nice," said Hilaire. "She's sure not to be there!
But when she does return I shall get it hot."

The prospect of Madame Hilaire's reappearance damped his enthusiasm, and
he suddenly fell into a state of despondency. He remembered in his
dejection the explicit injunctions which both M. de Saynthine and
Chéri-Bibi had given hem. He swore like a trooper and put on full
speed.

"You look quite upset all of a sudden," said Zoé. "What's the matter?"

"Nothing. I'm late."

"I say, don't smash us to pieces. When do I go to my place?"

"To-morrow."

"Where are you taking me?"

"To the hotel where I've booked a room for you."

He could not very well confess to Zoé that having himself engaged a
room in the town he had at first taken one for her in his own hotel, but
that by chance Chéri-Bibi heard of it, and burst into a violent fit of
anger at the thought that M. Hilaire should be guilty of an act contrary
to the proprieties. M. Hilaire had in vain indignantly protested that
his liking for his shop-assistant was an entirely platonic one, and that
up to that time they had but exchanged plums, not kisses. "One is more
than enough," replied Chéri-Bibi with authority, rolling his big eyes.
"'Sufficient for the day' . . ."

"Is it in your hotel?" asked Zoé.

"No," returned M. Hilaire, reddening.




CHAPTER XXII

MONSIEUR TOULOUSE'S SHOP


Didier had no need to inquire his way in order to find Monsieur
Toulouse's shop. The previous night, by a sort of fatality, as has been
said, he stopped outside the squalid-looking house and its odd
signboard.'

Feeling convinced that it was not in the interests of those masters in
the art of blackmail to play him any trick, and being himself prepared
to make every possible sacrifice which might at least give him time for
reflection, and to decide whether he should adopt a graver course, he
was by no means alarmed as to the immediate consequences of his visit.

He understood quite well that, for the purposes of certain business in
which he required the cooperation of a man like the Burglar, M. de
Saynthine greatly preferred that the work should be done in the
semi-darkness of a room at the back of a shop.

Nevertheless Captain d'Haumont took his revolver with him by way of
precaution. He felt that his forces were returning to him; and it has
been seen in the course of this narrative that his strength was above
the common.

It was thus with a confident step that he made his way through the
labyrinth of narrow streets in the old town and proceeded straight to
Monsieur Toulouse's shop.

The day was closing in. Moreover it grew dark early between the
buildings in those mean alleys where two carts could not pass each
other. Glimmers of light began to pierce the shop-windows.

At the bade of M. Toulouse's shop, in the dusk, stood a candle, by the
light of which Didier recognized the Burglar crouching behind his
counter like a watch-dog in its kennel. As soon as his eyes fell on the
Captain, he came towards him with a profusion of bows, bidding him
welcome, and declaring that he was "quite honored by the presence of a
hero like Captain d'Haumont." He asked permission to close the door on
account of the draught.

Didier did not, at first, answer this contemptible preamble. He took a
good look round him at the clothes which stocked the miserable hole,
and, observing nothing suspicious, allowed Monsieur Toulouse to lock and
bolt the door.

"Now no one will come and disturb us," explained the second-hand clothes
dealer.

Had the Burglar been able to see the peculiar movement which was taking
place in the street, he might not perhaps have expressed himself in such
positive terms. As a matter of fact, a force of police was surrounding
the house, and indeed guarding the neighboring streets.

For some time past, robberies, burglaries, attempts at murder, the work
of one and the same gang, had followed one upon the other. It was known
that the gang's headquarters were in the old town, and that they were
assisted by a number of confederates who screened them from police
investigation.

The Caid's murder was included in the same series of crimes. A
detective-inspector who had often observed him loitering about the
streets of Nice, with his rugs on his shoulders, identified his corpse,
and wondered what had become of the rugs which the Mohammedan always
carried about with him. He discovered identical rugs in Monsieur
Toulouse's shop.

The behavior of the Burglar seemed to be suspicious, and the shop was
kept under observation. At nightfall men were seen calling on him,
slipping into the shop by stealth. In short, the police came to the
conclusion that they need not lode farther afield to discover the gang's
lair, and that if they organized a trap, they would be able to catch
the entire fraternity at a single stroke.

The trap was laid for that very evening. Orders were given that visitors
should be allowed to enter Monsieur Toulouse's shop, and "nabbed" on the
quiet as they came out.

It is quite likely that the police had already seen that afternoon
several interesting figures call at the shop, but Didier attracted their
curiosity more particularly, because of the care with which he was
enveloped in a huge overcoat with the collar turned up, and of the
difficulty of seeing even the tip of his nose under his soft felt hat
with the brim pressed down over his face.

Though Didier had started off without fear to keep his disagreeable
appointment, he was by no means anxious to be recognized as he entered
the shop. Thus he had chosen to wear an overcoat and a hat in which he
might consider himself safe from observation.

When the Burglar had locked the door, Didier in a calm voice said:

"I may tell you that I am armed, and at the least action which I don't
like, I will shoot you all like dogs."

"Oh, my dear Captain, you must have formed a very bad opinion of us
since our last meeting. You are armed, you say. Well, I am not armed.
I've no weapon in my hands or in my pockets. And I assure you that my
friends are not armed any more than I am. We must convince you, my dear
Captain, that you are here among friends. No, no, you haven't any better
friends in Nice or anywhere else than ourselves."

"Where are the others?" asked Didier. "Don't let us spin out the
business. I am not here to please myself."

"If you've come here to please us I think I can promise you that you
will leave the place with a light heart, a mind at rest, and free from
any feeling of remorse. When a man does what he can, in life, he does
what he must. We shan't ask you to do anything you 'can't' do, my dear
Captain. Would you mind stepping into the room behind the shop? That's
where our friends are waiting for you."

"Lead on."

The Burglar bowed and "led on." Didier followed with his hand in his
pocket clutching his revolver, prepared for anything that might happen.

He at once saw, seated at a table, two men whom he recognized. One was
the Parisian, who now called himself de Saynthine, and whom he had so
roughly handled the previous evening for persecuting Giselle and the
other was the Joker, who was dressed in black, looking as serious as a
solicitor's clerk. He had before him, on the table, a morocco leather
portfolio.

M. de Saynthine had risen and, pointing to a chair facing him on the
other side of the table, begged Captain d'Haumont to be seated. The
Joker nodded slightly, and straightway opened his portfolio, taking from
it sundry papers. Pens, paper and an inkstand lay on the table.

"I will sit down when the Burglar, who is standing beside me, has taken
his place with you on your side of the table," said d'Haumont, who
seemed in no way perturbed.

"Bless me, Captain d'Haumont, my name is Monsieur Toulouse, and I beg
you not to forget it, but apart from that there's nothing Monsieur
Toulouse wouldn't do to please you." So saying, the Burglar took up his
position on the other side of the table; and Didier sat down, placing
his revolver in front of him. M. de Saynthine smiled.

"I assure you that this inkstand is all that we shall need," interposed
the Joker.

"I'm listening," said Didier, throwing a swift glance round the room. He
was placed in such a way that there was no danger from the rear. The
room in which he found himself was, like the shop itself, filled with
every variety of "reach-me-down." Didier had no need to fear that some
confederate was hiding among the toggery. He observed that for the most
part it was hanging from the ceiling on iron rods. Moreover it was
inconceivable that the Parisian and his gang would admit any other
miscreant into the secret.

The room looked out on to a small courtyard, with a glass roof, the high
walls of which could be seen. A door with a hatch over it led on to
another courtyard. This door was locked. It was through the hatch over
the door that Didier caught sight of the courtyard's glass roof. The
room was connected with the shop not by a door but by an opening, and,
as the two rooms were not on the same level, the shop was reached by
means of three worn-out steps.

The Burglar was seated on the Parisian's right, while the Joker was on
his left. They looked like a full bench of judges, and as a matter of
course the presiding judge, M. de Saynthine, opened the proceedings.

"We need not indulge in unnecessary words," he said. "I will at once
come to the point. When Captain d'Haumont left his gold-digging business
in Guiana, it was in a particularly prosperous state, so that he was
able to bring to Europe with him something like two million francs'
worth of gold dust. Arrived in France, Captain d'Haumont married wealth.
Madame d'Haumont brought him as her marriage portion, to begin with, her
personal fortune which was left to her by her maternal great-aunt,
amounting to seven hundred thousand francs."

"Allow me," broke in the Joker. "You have made a slight mistake. To
begin with, this personal fortune amounts to"--and he turned the pages
of a report until he came to a figure--"exactly seven hundred and
forty-five thousand francs. But this fortune was made up of six hundred
thousand francs left to Madame d'Haumont by her great-aunt, who
disinherited Madame d'Haumont's mother for conduct of which she
disapproved; and one hundred and forty-five thousand francs, which came
to Madame d'Haumont from M. de la Boulays' brother, who left the
remainder of his wealth, amounting to four hundred thousand francs, to
M. de la Boulays"--fresh reference to the papers--"to be exact, four
hundred and thirty-two thousand, eight hundred francs, free of legacy
duty, which four hundred and thirty-two thousand, eight hundred francs
and the interest accruing thereon during five years, the amount of which
can easily be ascertained, were given by M. de la Boulays absolutely to
his daughter. The dowry amounted, therefore, to a grand total of one
million, one hundred and seventy-seven thousand, eight hundred francs,
without counting the interest in question."

"A very fine wedding present," said M. de Saynthine. "We have only
mentioned Madame d'Haumont's fortune to show how matters stand, and to
prove that Captain d'Haumont will not be reduced to beggary on the day
when he hands over his own property, worth two million francs, to his
old companions who worked with him for so many long years, and but for
whose devoted and entirely discreet assistance he would be nothing
to-day."

Having spoken, M. de Saynthine leaned towards Didier, who maintained a
gloomy silence.

"I don't know if I have made myself sufficiently clear," he said.

"Yes," returned Captain d'Haumont. "Unfortunately you have made yourself
only too clear."

A pause ensued. The Burglar broke it by remarking:

"We ought to have foreseen it. He's going to bargain."

"No," returned M. de Saynthine, "Captain d'Haumont is not going to
bargain. He will reflect that it might have cost him a great deal more.
He will appreciate the delicacy which we have shown in allowing him to
pay his debt to us without having to lay hands on his wife's property."

"Mlle. de la Boulays' property," interposed Didier, who dared not say
Madame d'Haumont, "does not belong to me. I will not touch a sou of
Mlle. de la Boulays' money."

"Calm yourself, Captain d'Haumont, seeing that your wife's fortune is
not in question, and we are not asking for any part of it," returned M.
de Saynthine.

"All the same, allow me to say," broke in the Joker, "that Captain
d'Haumont is wrong in saying that his wife's property does not belong to
him. It belongs to him as much as it belongs to her. He can dispose of
it in its entirety, because Captain and Madame d'Haumont were married
under the law of community of property between husband and wife. Captain
d'Haumont wanted this community of property converted into the law of
acquisition whereby the property belongs to the husband and wife
jointly, but Madame d'Haumont, with an unselfishness which one cannot
too highly praise, insisted on the former course, and M. de la Boulays
himself had to give way to her. Moreover, he did so all the more readily
inasmuch as he knew that he was dealing with a perfectly honest man who
would know how to manage with care and economy their mutual interests."

"You are wasting words," growled the Burglar. "Captain d'Haumont has got
to make up his mind. Is it to be yes or no?"

"I am prepared to give you everything that belongs to me," said Captain
d'Haumont. The three men at these words were quivering with delight when
he added: "Unfortunately for your expectations, which I consider
excessive, I do not possess more than one hundred and fifty thousand
francs."

Slightly nonplussed by this declaration, the three confederates burst
into laughter.

"What a good joke!" jeered the Burglar. "Who's going to believe that
humbug?"

M. de Saynthine intervened:

"I thought that I said what I had to say with sufficient clearness," he
observed. "Two million francs for us, and honor, fame, happiness,
security, love and one million francs for you."

"One million, one hundred and seventy-seven thousand, eight hundred
francs," corrected the Joker. "It strikes me that with the share we are
leaving you, you'll have nothing to complain of."

"We are much too generous," declared Monsieur Toulouse, who was
beginning to show irritation and struck the table with his fist. "It's
obvious that we shall have to resort to extreme measures."

M. de Saynthine placed his hand on Monsieur Toulouse's arm.

"Hold your tongue," he ordered. "We are not here to shout or to be
trifled with."

As he uttered these last words he turned to Didier and said:

"Be good enough, Monsieur, to answer us seriously."

"I tell you, with the utmost seriousness, that one hundred and fifty
thousand francs are all that I have left. I gave the rest to the State."

This time they stared at him in silent amazement. Captain d'Haumont did
not look as if he were "trifling." Nevertheless the Burglar could not
refrain from again striking the table with his clenched fist.

"He's getting at us. The thing's impossible," he cried.

"Personally I don't believe a word of it," declared the Joker with a
feeble smile.

"He is quite capable of doing such a thing," said the Parisian.

"You can have proof of it whenever you like," declared Didier with an
impassive air.

The Joker and the Burglar at once burst into a fit of indignation. They
called to mind what the Parisian had told them of the Nut's character,
and the rash deeds of which he was capable.

"Oh, the swine! if he's done that, he's robbed us," moaned Monsieur
Toulouse.

The Joker rose to his feet and, losing all self-restraint, treated
Captain d'Haumont with the familiarity with which he used to treat the
Nut.

"Do you think we've come all this way for one hundred and fifty thousand
francs?"

"Fifty thousand francs," corrected the Burglar, who knew how to
calculate at least as well as the Joker. "Why, we must be dreaming."

"Very well," said the Parisian, who had paused to reflect. "We'll test
what you say, and you'll have only yourself to blame if you've lied to
us, and it's a bad look-out for you if you've told us the truth."

"It's a certainty that he's telling lies."

"Be quiet," ordered the Parisian. "That's his business. Our business is
to receive the money. If you haven't a sou yourself----"

"Then, of course, he must hand over his wife's money."

Didier stood up, pale as death.

"Where are you going?"

"I'm going off because I have nothing more to say to you. My hundred and
fifty thousand francs are at your disposal. You can take them or leave
them. You cannot betray me without ruining yourselves. You won't get
another sou. You can think it over. I don't attach any value to my life.
You can have the hundred and fifty thousand francs or nothing at all.

"Sit down, Nut, and let's argue the thing out. It would be a pity for
all of us if you left us like this," said de Saynthine.

Now they no longer gave themselves airs. They let themselves go without
restraint, and were such men as life in a penal settlement had made of
them. They used slang and addressed each other in the familiar second
person. They had become once again comrades who were ready to come to an
understanding or fight to the death. They called him once more the Nut.

Didier was still on his feet.

"You haven't grasped the fact, Nut, that we don't want to blackmail you.
There's never any end to blackmail. If we accepted your hundred and
fifty thousand francs they would be gone in three months, and the whole
thing would begin over again. Nothing is to be done with a hundred and
fifty thousand francs between the three of us. It's not enough to make
even one honest man! But if you have any common sense, you will get us
out of our poverty once for all. We ask you to share with us what
property you have, whether it comes from your marriage or from any other
source."

"You must hand over a million, and you'll never hear of us again, I
promise you," said the Burglar, and he raised his hand as if he were
about to take an oath.

"I have a list of the securities pertaining to Madame d'Haumont," said
the Joker in his turn. "A pretty good lot of them could be sold at once,
and the others do not present insuperable difficulties. The Nut has the
power to do what he likes with these securities. His signature alone is
needed. There's no necessity to give any explanation; but if he wants to
supply one, it will be easy for him to do so. He has securities which
have gone up in value, and he is taking advantage of the fact to sell
them. Others have gone down in value, and he wants to get rid of them
before they depreciate still further. It's he who has the management of
the business. It's his duty to 'reinvest' the money. I'll take it on
myself to reinvest it. He has but to give me his signature, and he will
see what a good business man I am! Madame d'Haumont will suspect
nothing. We shall leave you the land and houses, and your
father-in-law's property which you will inherit. You have nothing to
complain of. Only you must sit down, old man, and take a pen. We have
already jawed too much. Time is passing, and we haven't really done
anything yet."

The three of them stared at Didier, who was still on his feet, very
pale, his eyes half closed, his revolver in his hand.

They did not fear the revolver. They knew very well that he was
incapable of shooting the three of them. He was not a Chéri-Bibi, was
not Didier, and then if he were to run away leaving three corpses behind
he would not escape a scandal. Moreover, as may be imagined, they would
not allow him to have it all his own way.

As they saw him standing, with a set, pale face, before them, and as
they closely watched the suppressed desperation to which they had driven
him, their fear was lest he should use the weapon against himself. In
truth he had a look about him of a man who was about to kill himself.

They instinctively realized it, and the Burglar and the Joker had no
need of a swift glance from M. de Saynthine to grasp the position. The
latter at once assumed a good-humored air.

"In reality it will be enough if we are agreed in principle," he said.
"A day or two will make no difference. The position in which we stand
towards each other to-day will be the same to-morrow. And we shall still
have at our command the same weapons, so that we can put an end to it if
it is unduly protracted. Let Captain d'Haumont show his good will and we
shan't fall out. Of course, we can't give Captain d'Haumont away to the
police without detriment to ourselves, but we are not concerned with the
police. The thought that Madame d'Haumont may remain indefinitely,
perhaps for ever, ignorant of things which she need not know--it depends
on him--will hasten our old friend's decision. Let him now make the
necessary arrangements to transfer securities to the value of one
hundred and fifty thousand francs to us, and we will talk about the rest
in a week's time."

Didier still clung to the supreme hope of coming to some understanding.

"I must go home now," he said. "I shan't come here again. I will meet M.
de Saynthine one evening by appointment, in a suitable and discreet
place. He will receive due notice here. Within the next four days we
shall either come to a definite agreement or each be free to go his own
way."

M. de Saynthine cast a further glance at his assistants.

"Very well, that's agreed," he said. "And may those four days of
reflection help you to become sensible. Good-by, Nut. Open the street
door, Monsieur Toulouse."

The Burglar made for the shop and Didier followed him.

"Only one way out of it," whispered the Parisian to the Joker.

The Joker had but to stretch out his arm and to press his hand against
the wall, and the stairs which led to the shop fell to pieces at the
moment when Didier was bearing down upon them with all his weight.

Didier uttered a cry, and hardly knowing what he did, raised his arms in
the air and fell. The three men were upon him in a flash. His revolver
had dropped on to the shop floor. Thus he was disarmed and in such a
position that it was almost impossible for him to shake off the human
cluster which was pressing him hard. He gave a hollow groan, to which
the others replied by bursting into hideous fits of laughter.

But suddenly the little game took another turn. Didier's moans were
answered by a loud shout mingled with a terrible crash.

The glass roof of the courtyard was shattered by an enormous weight, and
the door which connected the yard with the back room was battered in at
a blow. A human form rolled to the bandits' feet.

The three of them stood up, letting go their prey, with a simultaneous
cry: "Chéri-Bibi!"

Seized with an uncontrollable terror they staggered back, but seeing
that Chéri-Bibi appeared to be distraught they realized that he was
seriously injured, and they leapt at him, while the Parisian fired his
revolver point-blank at his chest.

Chéri-Bibi, however, clutched the weapon and the shot struck the wall
after grazing his hand, which began to bleed copiously. The bandits were
on him like hounds upon the quarry. With ever-increasing hatred for the
monster who came among them to interfere in their affairs, they might
have torn him to pieces, for Didier was wedged in the cavity in the
stairs and was trying in vain to release himself, when they heard the
sound of a commotion in the street, the shop door was broken down and
the police rushed in.

At the sound of the first blows on the shop front the Parisian, the
Burglar and the Joker took refuge at the back of the courtyard and
remained in a dark staircase by which, whatever happened, they could
make good their escape.

The police followed close upon their heels, passing the two men who lay
on the floor without troubling about them for the time being.

Chéri-Bibi and the Nut were left to themselves. They could hear the
police-calls in the passages, the staircases, and even in the street.

Chéri-Bibi dragged himself towards the Nut and endeavored to get on his
feet, but his leg must have been broken, for he fell to the ground
moaning: "_Fatalitas_, my leg has given way!"




CHAPTER XXIII

HERO AND OUTLAW


The Nut at length managed to release himself from the trap in which he
had been caught. He turned to Chéri-Bibi and could not repress a
muffled exclamation when he heard Chéri-Bibi say that he had broken his
leg.

"Now make tracks while there's time," Chéri-Bibi whispered. "You have
less than five minutes if you want to get away from here. Never mind me.
I can't move my leg. Listen: Go past the rag-and-bone shop at the back
of the courtyard on the right. No one is there. Slip up the stairs on
the right; the others took the one on the left. When you get to the
attics, scoot along the roofs till you come to the corner of the little
square. Get down as best you can. You'll find a car waiting there, in
charge of your friend Hilaire. He won't be surprised to see you. He
expects us. Good luck!"

The Nut stooped and put his arms round Chéri-Bibi. He lifted him by a
powerful effort.

"What are you doing?" asked the other, who was tying a handkerchief
round his bleeding hand.

"I'm going to carry you," said the Nut simply. "You don't suppose I'm
going to leave you here."

"Oh, damn it, you'll jolly well do nothing of the sort. I'm done for. I
tell you my leg's broken. You can't think of carrying me as if I were a
doll. You don't know my weight. Besides, you must clear off--do a guy.
The police will come back. You'll get nabbed, and you won't save me. A
lot of good that will do you!"

"Listen, Chéri-Bibi, you killed the Caid. They're hunting for his
murderer. You can't escape the guillotine this time. I won't leave you
here."

He went down on his knees, took Chéri-Bibi by the arms, and hoisted him
on his shoulders.

"Oh, it's the finest thing I've ever seen in my life," sobbed
Chéri-Bibi. "If there's a Providence, may He help us now. . . . And let
me creep along, since you absolutely insist on it. I can lean on your
shoulder and you can hold me up. But if you see them coming, chuck me."

They crossed the courtyard, which was all in darkness and formed a sort
of well, overlooked by squalid lodging-houses which might have been
empty, for no face appeared at the garret-windows. The people who
swarmed in them remained in their rooms, refusing to show any interest
in what was happening, and, for that matter, never interfering in these
dramatic events save to assist burglars to escape the constable.

Cheri-Bibi guided the Nut. When he realized that his old friend
was determined to keep the appointment which the "jail-birds" had made,
he must have carefully examined the premises. His appearance on the
scene in the midst of the struggle was not a bolt from the blue.

Soon they reached a staircase which was so narrow that the Nut had great
difficulty in turning round in it with his burden on his back.

"Let go, old man, let go. You'll only get yourself pinched. What does an
old horse like me matter?"

Didier continued to climb the stairs. In the meantime the police had
come down again by another staircase. They had lost the trail of the
three bandits, but considered that their eventual escape was impossible
owing to their plan of surrounding the entire block of houses. They came
back to the shop, and stopped in amazement when they noticed that the
man and his companion, both of whom appeared to be seriously wounded,
were gone. They could see only a few bloodstains.

They went to the street door. Here the men posted on guard told them
that no one had left the house.

"Very queer," observed a detective-inspector. "Which way have the two
birds flown? One of them looked as if his leg was broken, and the other
was in a pretty bad way. My opinion is that it would be more interesting
to find the two victims than the men who attacked them."

He followed the traces of blood on the flagstones. These led him through
the small courtyard to the rag-and-bone shop and the squalid staircase
with its damp walls which ran up the building to the right. "They can't
be far away," he muttered. And the police darted forward on this new
hunt.

Chéri-Bibi heard them running up the staircase. "We are badly done!" he
said.

A door on one of the landings stood ajar. The Nut pushed it open. A
little boy and girl began to utter shrill cries. Chéri-Bibi gave them a
fierce look which frightened them out of their lives and at once
silenced them.

The Nut turned the key in the lock; and the policemen passed the
landing, without stopping, on their way to the roof.

Unfortunately, at that moment the children's mother appeared. She had
gone out to do some shopping, or to have a gossip with a neighbor, and
was hastening home to her children in a state of anxiety caused by the
disturbance in the house. She was amazed to find that she could not open
the door.

"Didi! . . . Gégé!" she cried, and the children at once returned to
life and began to squall anew, and then suddenly they held their
tongues, silenced by the frightful look in Chéri-Bibi's eyes.

The mother furiously shook the door.

"But who can have locked the door? . . . Not the youngsters. . . . Didi!
. . . Gégé! . . ."

Fresh cries and fresh silence. Then the mother had a fit of hysterical
sobbing on the landing. The police came back. She told them that she had
just come home to find the door locked. Her children were alone and
something dreadful must have happened. At that moment the youngsters
began to cry as if they were being flayed alive. They had recovered
their breath, for Chéri-Bibi was no longer looking at them. The mother
began to scream. . . .

"Hang it all, they're here!" said a policeman.

The mother grasped the situation, and was seized with indescribable
fright. She threw herself against the door, shouting imprecations.

"Murder! . . . Murder! . . . They're murdering my children! . . ."

Policemen attempted to break in the door, but the woman's presence
hindered them, and when they tried to push her aside she scratched their
faces with her claws. She was like a mad woman.

The Nut had opened a window which looked out on to a narrow, deserted
street--a sort of blind alley. Chéri-Bibi dragged himself so far, and
they took a look round. They saw a rain-pipe fixed to the wall by iron
hooks. It was their last hope. By making use of this rain-pipe they
could reach the structure above, and climb upon the roof.

"Off you go," whispered Chéri-Bibi. "Good-bye. Don't trouble about me
any more, or I'll jump out of the window."

Nothing that Chéri-Bibi could say, even now, made any impression. How
the Nut performed the miracle of carrying him and saving him was a
riddle which he could not himself have solved five minutes later.

They happened to be on the top floor but one, and the stories were
extremely low. The clamps held securely. The molding of the window above
did duty likewise as a support for the Nut.

It looked as if they might be hurled headlong below. They could still
hear the cries of mother and children, the shouts of policemen, and the
echo of tremendous blows striking the door, which, fortunately, was
solidly built, as is usually the case in very old houses.

At length Chéri-Bibi and the Nut reached the roof, climbed through a
window facing them, and passed into a room in which another window led
to the next roof. They made for it, but here they came up against a
chimney and nearly fell into the street.

The Nut began to pant like a bellows. They could hear the shouts of the
policemen in pursuit who had returned to the roofs, and also the shouts
which they exchanged with their men in the street.

Chéri-Bibi still directed the Nut, whose progress was becoming
increasingly difficult, for he was almost carrying him.

"Stop here. Passengers off first, please!"

They slipped through a dormer window, found themselves in a loft and
crossed a staircase.

"Let me go. I'll get down on one foot."

The Nut did not even hear him. Startled faces appeared in the doorways.

"Go bade to bed, all of you, damn it!" shouted Chéri-Bibi. "I don't
want to see your mugs. Keep quiet or I'll murder you!" Then, turning to
the Nut, he said: "Another minute and we shall reach the car. All the
same, I should never have thought you were so strong. I must say that
ten years in a penal settlement have given you a bit of muscle!"

They reached the passage on the ground floor from which they could
signal to the car. Afterwards they would have but to start off at full
speed.

"I hear the car. The Dodger has grasped the situation. He has set his
engine going."

The Nut, who still bore Chéri-Bibi's immense weight on his shoulders,
ventured to glance into the street.

"Yes, the car is there!" he said.

"Not a bit of it, she's not there," squeaked Chéri-Bibi. "_Fatalitas!_
That's the police car!"

He assumed that de Saynthine and his confederates had managed in their
escape to jump into the car driven by Hilaire before they arrived, which
was obviously not in Chéri-Bibi's plan. He had provided for everything
that might happen except the intervention of the police.

Suddenly they saw the policemen enter their car and order the chauffeur
to drive round the old town. And immediately after their departure
Hilaire came up with his car.

Chéri-Bibi and the Nut made a sign and walked out of the passage.
Hilaire saw them and beckoned to them. And two huge forms came towards
him, one carrying the other. He helped the Nut to install Chéri-Bibi in
the car.

"You managed to put de Saynthine off the scent," gasped Chéri-Bibi.

"No mistake about that!" returned Hilaire, who had merely dropped Mlle.
Zoé at her hotel and was expecting a warm reception from Chéri-Bibi.

"To Cape Ferrat! And let her go for all she's worth," ordered
Chéri-Bibi.

The car drove off. Almost at once the car containing the policemen
returned to the square, and seeing the car with the hood up in front of
them, started off like a meteor to attack it.

"If you don't give them the slip as well, it's all up with us!" yelled
Chéri-Bibi.




CHAPTER XXIV

A GUARDIAN ANGEL


At the turning of Saint Jean bridge by which the headland leading to
Cape Ferrat is entered, Hilaire pulled up the car and jumped out.

"Get out," he cried. "They're gaining on us. My engine is misfiring.
They'll overtake us in a minute. But I'll go on and they'll follow me,
thinking that you are still in the car. I'll manage to pull through all
right, never fear."

"I shall stay with the Dodger. Let me go," exclaimed Chéri-Bibi.

But the Nut, assisted by the Dodger, took Chéri-Bibi again by his
shoulders and darted behind a sloping bank by the roadside. Just then
the police car came into view and the Dodger drove off again.

Nevertheless the police stopped their car at the turning to Saint Jean
bridge. They held a consultation. Their suspicions must have been
aroused, and they must have seen Hilaire's car pull up, for they split
into two parties; one half of them continued their way in the car and
the other crossed the bridge.

The Nut took advantage of their indecision to go forward a little way
under cover of a wall. Chéri-Bibi begged him for the last time to leave
him on the road.

"I have recovered my strength," the Nut returned. "It's all right. The
headland is a veritable maze. They won't be able to find us in the
darkness. In a quarter of an hour we shall reach the villa gardens. Then
we shall be safe."

* * * * *

Françoise in the villa was in a state of the utmost moment when her
mind, still obsessed by the fright-anxiety owing to Didier's protracted
absence at a full vision which she had seen, could not recover its calm.
She began to give way to a feeling of despair which might well overpower
her, for she was unable to put it into words. Nevertheless, the fierce
misgivings which clutched at her heart would have passed unperceived.

She had the strength to get up. She put on a dressing-gown and lay on a
sofa in the little sitting-room which adjoined their rooms. She lit a
lamp and took up a book, and dismissed her maid for the night. She
requested to be left alone until Captain d'Haumont's return.

Outwardly she appeared quite self-possessed. What she had seen was so
dreadful and so incapable of explanation that she felt above all that
Didier must not suspect her of having seen the thing. And, in order that
he might not suspect it, she strove to assume in front of her servants a
listless and impassive look, and an appearance of purely physical
weakness which would deceive Didier.

For she would have to deceive him in order to get at the truth; in order
to try to understand him. To succeed in her purpose she must rely on
herself alone. Her husband's secret was of such a nature and appeared to
be wrapped in such appalling mystery that she realized that he would do
his utmost to keep it from her rather than to confess the truth. And the
truth must be all the more terrible since he was so jealously guarding
it.

She refused to drive him to falsehood or subterfuge, or force him to
resort to expedients. That would be unworthy of her, unworthy of her
love. She meant to take her full share in the deception; that was
essential to his happiness. And when, by virtue of wonderful patience
and craft, she discovered the truth, she would act as if she did not
know it, since it was necessary that she should not know anything. Had
not Didier, who was devoted to her and would have died of grief if she
had married another man--she was certain of that--had not Didier gone so
far as to advise her to marry de Gorbio rather than share his secret
with her?

Only by the force of extraordinary circumstances was Didier driven to
tell her that he loved her. How could she fail to see that if he now
became aware that she knew he might never again tell her that he loved
her? Possibly he would leave her. Possibly he would shoot himself. Their
marriage had occurred, she saw quite clearly, only because Didier had
forgotten for the nonce, the thing that she must not know. Was she by
some indiscreet question, some specific lack of intelligence, to recall
to his mind this thing whose frightful face she had for a moment caught
sight of?

Never! She would hold her peace, and though she might render his
formidable task of dissimulation in her presence less difficult. For she
now realized that this was no case of some former love affair, or some
trivial adventure of which he was disposed to exaggerate the
significance as far as she was concerned. No, it was something more than
that. After what she had seen, she could not doubt that some horror lay
behind the awful thing. . . . But, without allowing him to know
anything, she would guard with zealous and unremitting care their love,
and her faith in Didier should drive away the trouble.

For she did not doubt him, and perhaps she would love him all the more
because he was thus struck down by fate. Her reflections inspired and
uplifted her; filled her with a new life. Although Didier had held the
monster in his arms, she had not lost her love for him.

Where was he at that moment? Why had he not returned home? She refused
to believe his story that he had to report himself in the town. Suddenly
she drew herself up. She heard the sound of voices. Someone was
violently ringing the garden gate bell. She ran to the French window
leading to the balcony which ran round the first floor. She looked out,
concealed behind the curtains. The night was sufficiently bright to
enable her to distinguish some four or five men. They were calling out.
A manservant hastened up to them, opened the gate, and they scattered
over the garden on the run. A few words reached her ears.

"The police!" she murmured, and sank back upon the sofa.

At that moment, although every window was closed, she distinctly caught
her husband's voice on the balcony: "Everything is locked. . . . We're
done for!" She stifled a cry and turned her head. Then, looking above
the curtain over the lower part of the balcony window, she saw, behind a
number of giant mimosa plants which hid this corner of the frontage, an
astounding sight--her husband bending under the monster's weight.

She had the strength to stand up and quietly to open one of the windows
at the far end of the balcony, and to fling herself into the darkness of
her bedroom. From the back of the room she saw Didier steal into the
sitting-room and close the window. As to the monster, he had rolled on
to the landing. Didier had scarcely time to push him under the sofa and
to take refuge behind a curtain when a knock came at the door.

Then Françoise returned to the sitting-room, lay down cm the sofa, took
up her book again, and said, "Come in!"

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DARK ROAD: ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
